---
published: true
layout: post
date: '2021-09-19 15:56:07 +0700'
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/1'
---
{% include katex.html %}

I am going to assume that you know at least a very little bit about set theory. You should know that sets are a collection of objects and that if \\( S \\) is a set, then the statement \\( x\in S \\) means that the object '\\( x\\)' is contained inside of the set \\( S \\). You should know the proper notation and conventions we use to describe sets. You should know that sets can contain other sets, for example, \\( S= \\{\\{1\\}, \\{1,3,4\\} \\} \\), is a set containing a set containing 1 and a set containing the numbers 1, 3 and 4. And so on and so forth... you get the point, just basic stuff so that we can get to the good part.

First things first, we need to set up some ground rules, and by that, I mean axioms. The first axiom I'd like to introduce will give us a way to decide whether or not two sets are equal.

> Axiom of Extension. Two sets are equal if and only if they have the same elements.

If \\( A,B \\) are two sets, then we write \\( A=B \\) to mean that they are equal, and \\( A\neq B \\) to mean that they are not. A more logically formal way to present the Axiom of Extension is as follows:

\\[ A=B \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad \forall x, \ (x\in A \Leftrightarrow x\in B), \tag{1}\\]

or alternatively,

\\[ A=B \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad (\forall x, \ x\in A \ \Rightarrow \ x\in B \ \land \ \forall x, \ x\in B \ \Rightarrow \ x\in A). \tag{2}\\]

The statement \\( \forall x, \ x\in A \ \Rightarrow \ x\in B \\) on its own is useful. It means that every element of \\( A \\) is in \\( B \\), whenever this is true, we say that \\( A \\) is a subset of \\( B \\), notationally, it will look like \\( A\subseteq B \\). Similarly, we write \\( B\subseteq A \\) whenever \\( \forall x, \ x\in B \ \Rightarrow \ x\in A \\). Notice then that

\\[ A=B \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad A\subseteq B \ \land \ B\subseteq A. \tag{3}\\]

Out of the three different ways we have formulated set equality, (3) is the most convenient and useful, we will seldom use the other two. Thus, in order to prove that two sets, \\( A,B \\) are equal, we just need to show that \\( A\subseteq B \\) and \\( B\subseteq A \\) separately. Then how about proving that \\( A\subseteq B \\)? I like to think about it like the following game:

1. Sal will pick an arbitrary element, \\( x \\), from the set \\( A \\).
2. Kwan must then convince Sal that the chosen \\( x \\) satisfies \\( x\in B \\).
3. If Kwan succeeds then he wins, otherwise Sal wins.

The statement \\( A\subseteq B \\) is true if and only if Kwan has a winning strategy, that is, a strategy that when implemented, results in a 100% win rate, i.e, no matter what element Sal picks, Sal will always succeed in showing that the chosen element is a member of \\( B \\). Thinking of proofs in terms of games is certainly unconventional, but I really like to think in this way, it is more intuitive.

> What if the set \\( A \\) is empty in the above game, meaning it has no elements, then Sal is unable to perform the first step, how will the game proceed then? We will deal with this in the next chapter

This paragraph is not important to our discussion right now, but it will be relevant in the next chapter, I introduce it now because we might as well do so while we are talking about subsets. The negation of the statement, \\( A\subseteq B \\) is denoted by \\( A\not\subseteq B \\), logically we have:

\\[ A\not\subseteq B \ \Longleftrightarrow \ \neg(A\subseteq B) \ \Longleftrightarrow \ \neg(\forall x, \ x\in A \ \Rightarrow \ x\in B). \\]

If you know your logic well, then you will know that

\\[ \neg(\forall x, \ x\in A \ \Rightarrow \ x\in B) \ \Longleftrightarrow \ \exists x, \ x\in A \ \land \ x\notin B. \\]

In other words, \\( A\not\subseteq B \\) is equivalent to the existance of an element inside \\( A \\) that is not contained in \\( B \\), keep this in mind later on.

### Relations

A relation can be thought of as a 2-input function, the output is boolean, either true/false. For example, \\( = \\) is a relation between sets, we input two sets, ask whether or not they are equal, and we'll get either true or false for an output.

> Definition. Let \\( \sim \\) be a relation, then we say that \\( \sim \\) is:
- Reflexive when for any \\( x \\), \\( \ x\sim x \\).
- Symmetric when for any \\( x,y \\), \\( \ x\sim y \Longleftrightarrow y\sim x \\).
- Transitive when for any \\( x,y,z \\), \\( \text{ if } x\sim y \text{ and } y\sim z, \text{ then }x\sim z \\).

It is obvious that any set \\( A \\) is a subset of itself, i.e, \\( A\subset A \\), thus \\( \subseteq \\) is reflexive (is \\( = \\) reflexive?). It is easy to see that \\( \subseteq \\) is not symmetric, take for example \\( A=\\{1\\} \\) and \\( B=\\{1,2\\} \\), then \\( A\subseteq B \\) is true, but \\( B\subseteq A \\) is not true because \\( 2\notin A \\) (is \\( = \\) symmetric?). Finally, there is transitivity, in order for \\( \subseteq \\) to satisfy this property, we must have that for any three sets, \\( A,B,C \\), if \\( A\subseteq B \\) and \\( B\subseteq C \\), then it must be that \\( A\subseteq C \\). 

> Claim. \\( \subseteq \\) is transitive.

Proof. Given that \\( A\subseteq B \\) and \\( B\subseteq C \\), we need to provide Kwan with a winning strategy for the following game:

1. Sal picks an element \\( x\in A \\)
2. Kwan must convince Sal that \\( x\in C \\)

Kwan knows that \\( A\subseteq B \\), and since \\( x\in A \\), this must mean that \\( x\in B \\), but he is also aware that \\( B\subseteq C \\), and since \\( x\in B \\), this must mean that \\( x\in C \\). \\( \Box \\)

> Show that \\( = \\) is transitive.

> \\( \in \\) can also be thought of as a relation, show whether or not it is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. 

We will now introduce a second axiom:

> Axiom of Specification. For any set \\( A \\), we can set any condition, \\( S \\) to which the elements of \\( A \\) may or may not satisfy. There is then a set \\( B \\) containing only the elements of \\( A \\) satisfying \\( S \\).

To indicate a \\( B \\) obtained from some set \\( A \\) and condition \\( S \\) via the above axiom, we write

\\[ B=\\{x\in A \ \vert \ S(x)\\}. \\]

This literally reads, \\( B \\) is a set containing the elements \\( x\in A \\) for which \\( S(x) \\) is satisfied. For example, we can set \\( A=\mathbb{N} \\) and \\( S(x)=x\text{ is even}\\), thus

\\[ B=\\{x\in \mathbb{N} \ \vert \ x\text{ is even}\\}=\\{2,4,6,\ldots\\}. \\]

An important consequence of the axiom of specification is the following claim:

> Claim. There is no set which contains everything.

Proof. Suppose Sal claims to have found a set \\( A \\) which contains everything, Kwan however, disagrees. By invoking the axiom of specification, with \\( S(x)=x\notin x \\), there exists a set \\( B=\\{ x\in A \ \vert \ x\notin x\\} \\), a set containing only the elements of \\( A \\) which do not contain themselves. In other words,

\\[ x\in B \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad x\in A \ \land \ x\notin x. \tag{4} \\]

Sal needs to defend the claim that \\( B\in A \\), otherwise \\( B\notin A \\), contradicting the fact that \\( A \\) contains everything. Here is how Kwan will refute Sal's claim: he will ask Sal whether or not \\( B\in B \\), no matter what Sal answers, he will contradict himself. 

Suppose Sal agrees that \\( B\in B \\), then by (1), we obtain \\( B\notin B \\), a contradiction. Suppose Sal disagrees, i.e, that \\( B\notin B \\), this will again lead to a contradiction because (1) gives \\( B\in B \\). \\( \Box \\)
