---
published: true
layout: post
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/2'
---
{% include katex.html %}

To be honest, the way we are doing things currently is not 100% rigorous, for instance, I have used sets containing numbers as elements to illustrate some of my points, however, there is no axiom stating that I am allowed to take a number, \\( x \\), put brackets around it, \\( \\{x\\} \\) and be able to call that a set. If we want to be rigorous, we need to follow our axioms, and we need to do so religiously. Of course, I broke this rule a bit to make my explanations clearer. 

Let us start from the beginning then, let us assume that there is no other mathematical knowledge apart from basic logic and the two axioms we have introduced thus far. This makes for a pretty barren landscape, we have only considered sets arbitrarily, but do sets even exist in the first place? We haven't yet introduced an axiom which explicitly states that a set should exist, this is certainly a problem.

If we are going to introduce a set into existence, which set is it going to be? what will it contain? Well, since we currently know not of any other objects, the only set we can will into existence is a set containing nothing. We call such a set an empty set.

> Empty Set Axiom. There is (at least one) set which satisfies \\( \forall x, x\notin A \\).

It is true that \\( x \\) in the above is meant to represent an object, but currently, the only objects capable of existing are sets, so really, any mention of objects or variables refers then to a set for it is the only object capable of existing via our current knowledge. We will see later that it is not necessary to introduce any other type of objects, all of mathematics can be constructed or expressed in terms of sets!

First, let us make sure that there is only one empty set:

> Claim. There is only one set, \\( A \\) satisfying \\( \forall x, x\notin A \\).

Proof. Suppose there are two sets \\( A,B \\) and both satisfy the condition. Assume that \\( A\neq B \\), this means that either \\( A\not\subseteq B \\) or \\( B\not\subseteq A \\). Suppose that \\( A\not\subseteq B \\), this means that there exists an element in \\( A \\) that is not contained in \\( B \\), but since \\( A \\) has no elements, this is not possible. Similarly, \\( B\not\subseteq A \\) is impossible as well, thus, we must have \\( A=B \\). \\( \Box \\)

Since the empty set is unique, we will assign the symbol \\( \varnothing \\) to represent the empty set. It is easy to notice that for any set \\( A \\), we have \\( \varnothing \subseteq A \\) since \\( \varnothing \not\subseteq A \\) is impossible (why?). You might think that this is a pretty uninteresting result considering that the only set currently in existence is \\( \varnothing \\), this problem will be dealt with shortly.

Instead of introducing more axioms which assert the existence of additional sets, we will introduce axioms which allow us to create additional sets from existing ones, this means that every possible set will be derived from the empty set. We will now introduce the creation axioms:

> Pairing Axiom. For any two sets, \\( A,B \\), there exists a set \\( \mathcal{C} \\) having as members just \\( A \\) and \\( B \\).
\\[ \forall A,B, \ \exists \mathcal{C} \  (x\in \mathcal{C} \ \Longleftrightarrow \ x=A \ \lor \ x=B). \\]
In other words, \\( \mathcal{C}=\\{A,B\\} \\).

> Union Axiom (Preliminary Form). For any two sets, \\( A,B \\), there exists a set \\( C \\) consisting of the members of both \\( A \\) and \\( B \\). Such a set is said to be the union of \\( A \\) and \\( B \\).
\\[ \forall A,B, \ \exists C \ (x\in C \ \Longleftrightarrow \ x\in A \ \lor \ x\in B). \\]

> Power Set Axiom. For any set \\( A \\), there exists a set \\( B \\) whose members are exactly the subsets of \\( A \\). Such a set is said to be the power set of \\( A \\)
\\[ \forall A, \exists B \ (x\in B \ \Longleftrightarrow \ x\subseteq A). \\]

The union of two sets, \\( A,B \\) is given by \\( A\cup B \\) while the power set of a set \\( A \\) is given by \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \\). With this, we can begin creating new sets from existing sets, for example, pairing \\( \varnothing \\) with \\( \varnothing \\) gives us \\( \\{\varnothing,\varnothing\\}=\\{\varnothing\\} \\), and now there are two sets in existence.

We should confirm first that \\( \\{\varnothing\\}\neq \varnothing \\). This is easy, notice that \\( \varnothing \in \\{\varnothing\\} \\), but \\( \varnothing\notin \varnothing \\), thus, \\( \\{\varnothing\\}\not\subseteq \varnothing \\), meaning \\( \\{\varnothing\\}=\varnothing \\) is impossible.

We can keep playing around, for example, \\( \mathcal{P}(\\{\varnothing\\})=\\{\\{\varnothing\\},\varnothing\\} \\). This set can also be constructed by pairing \\( \\{\varnothing\\} \\) with \\( \varnothing \\). Notice that we can keep going deeper and deeper with our construction, starting from one, there is now basically an infinite number of distinct sets in existence, not so boring anymore eh?

### Unions, Generalized
You may have noticed that the union axiom in the above is written in its preliminary form, it turns out that we can come up with a stronger union axiom that implies the preliminary version and also allows us to define the union of between infinite sets, of course, infinity is not a concept we will deal with soon, but it is important that we introduce this axiom soon, it is an axiom afterall.

First, let us prove some basic properties of the union to get a better understanding of what it does. Notice if \\( A,B,C \\) are sets we have \\( A\cup A=A \\), \\( A\cup B=B\cup A \\). and also \\( (A\cup B)\cup C=A\cup (B\cup C) \\). These are easy to prove.

> Claim. For any set \\(A, \ A\cup \varnothing=A. \\)

Proof. If \\( A \\) is empty we are done. Now Kwan needs to win both of these games:

1. Sal picks an \\( x\in A \\) and Kwan has to show that \\( x\in A\cup \varnothing \\)
2. Sal picks an \\( x\in A\cup \varnothing \\) and Kwan has to show that \\( x\in A \\)

For the first game, given \\( x\in A \\) (by Sal), Kwan knows that \\( x\in A\cup \varnothing \\) because by definition:

\\[ x\in A\cup \varnothing \quad \Longrightarrow \quad x\in A \lor x\in \varnothing. \\]

For the second game, given \\( x\in A\cup \varnothing \\) (by Sal), Kwan knows that by definition, either \\( x\in A \\) or \\( x\in \varnothin\\) is true, the second is impossible so \\( x\in A \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

Now that we are more acquainted with unions, let us state the generalized union axiom:

> Union Axiom. For any set \\( A \\), there exists a set \\( B \\) which contains the members of the members of \\( A \\).
\\[ \forall x[x\in B \ \Longleftrightarrow \ (\exists b\in A), \ x\in b]. \\]
This set is called the union of \\( A \\), denoted \\( \bigcup A \\). 

For example, if \\( A,B \\) are sets then \\( \bigcup \\{A,B\\}=A\cup B \\). Here is a proof:

Proof. We will first prove that \\( A\cup B\subseteq \bigcup \\{A,B\\} \\), we pick an arbitrary element \\( x\in A\cup B \\), so either \\( x\in A \\) or \\( x\in B \\). Suppose \\( x\in A \\), to prove that \\( x\in \bigcup \\{A,B\\}\\), we need to find a \\( b\in \\{A,B\\} \\) such that \\( x\in b \\), of course, \\( b=A \\) works just fine. The case when \\( x\in B \\) is similar. 

Now we move on to prove that \\( \bigcup \\{A,B\\}\subseteq A\cup B \\). Choose an arbitrary \\( x\in \bigcup \\{A,B\\} \\), then by definition there exists a \\( b\in \\{A,B\\} \\) satisfying \\( x\in b \\). Of course, given that \\( b \\) exists, it has to either be \\( A \\) or \\( B \\). Suppose \\( b=A \\), then we have \\( x\in A \\), and thus \\( x\in A\cup B \\). The case when \\( b=B \\) is similar. \\( \Box \\)

> Note, the above implies that for any set \\( A \\), \\( \ \bigcup \\{A\\}=\bigcup \\{A,A\\}=A\cup A=A\\).

> What if either \\( A \\) or \\( B \\) is empty in the above proof? What then?

Combining the pairing axiom with the generalized union axiom will give us the preliminary union axiom. For example, given two sets \\( A,B \\), we can pair them to create the set \\( \\{A,B\\} \\), we can then take its union, \\( \bigcup \\{A,B\\} \\) which we know equals \\( A\cup B \\). Thus, the existence of \\( A\cup B \\) depends on pairing and the generalized union axiom, the preliminary form is redundant. 

It is easy to see then that 

\\[ \bigcup \\{A,B,C\\}=A\cup B\cup C, \quad \bigcup \\{A,B,C,D\\}=A\cup B\cup C\cup D, \quad \text{and so on...}  \\]

So if \\( A \\) is a set containing within itself an infinite number of sets, i.e, \\(A=\\{A_1,A_2,\ldots\\} \\), then since the union

\\[ A_1\cup A_2\cup \cdots \\]

is not defined, we can just agree that the above equals \\( \bigcup A \\) which is defined (by our axioms). This is what makes the generalized union axiom better than the one we had previous. Anyways the concept of infinity is still way out of reach right now so lets not dwell on this further.

### Intersections
Some of you familiar with basic set theory will notice that we are forgetting about the intersection, \\( cap \\), should we introduce a new axiom for it? It turns out we do not need to!

> For those unfamiliar, the intersection between two sets, \\( A,B \\) is given by \\( A\cap B \\) and it is meant to contain objects which are **both** in \\( A \\) and in \\( B \\).

It follows directly from the axiom of specification. If we are given two sets \\( A,B \\), by the axiom of specification,

\\[ A\cap B=\\{ x\in A \ \vert \ x\in B \\} \\]

exists. Alternatively we could have done \\( A\cap B=\\{ x\in B \ \vert \ x\in A \\} \\), but this doesn't matter. What about an infinite intersection? If \\( A=\\{A_1,A_2,\ldots\\} \\) then it is reasonable to assume that we can define \\( \bigcap A \\) so that \\( x\in \bigcap A \ \Leftrightarrow \ \forall a\in A, \ x\in a \\), i.e, it is the set containing those elements which are contained in every member of \\( A \\). Assuming that \\( A\neq \varnothing \\), the existence of \\( \bigcap A \\) is also a result of the axiom of specification:

Proof. First, we need to choose a set, since \\( A\neq \varnothing \\), we can pick any element (it does not matter), say \\( y\in A \\), this will be the set to use. Our condition can then be \\( \forall a\in A, \ x\in a \\). All in all,

\\[ \bigcap A=\\{x\in y \ \vert \ \forall a\in A, \ x\in a\\} \\]

exists (by axiom of specification). \\( \Box \\)

Why did we ignore the case where \\( A=\varnothing \\), is there something so wrong with \\( \bigcap \empty \\)? Yes! it's existence will result in a contradiction:

> Claim. \\( \bigcap \varnothing \\) contains everything, thus it should not exist (remember we have already shown that there cannot be a set which contains everything).

Proof. Suppose not, i.e, that there exists a set \\( B \\) such that \\( B\notin \bigcap \varnothing \\). Since

\\[ x\in \bigcap \varnothing \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad \forall A\in \varnothing, \ x\in A \\]

we must have \\( \exists A\in \varnothing, \ B\notin A \\), but nothing can be an element of the empty set, thus this cannot be the case. \\( \Box \\)

### Extra Tid-Bits

> Theorem 1.2.1 If \\( x\in A \\) we must have \\( x\subseteq \bigcup A \\).

Proof. Let \\( y\in x \\) be arbitrary, to prove that \\( y\in \bigcup A \\) we need to show that there exists some set in \\( A \\) which contains \\( y \\), obviously the set \\( x\in A \\) fits the bill. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.2 If \\( A,B \\) are two sets such that \\( A\subseteq B \\), then \\( \bigcup A\subseteq \bigcup B \\).

Proof. Given \\( A\subseteq B \\), Kwan must win the following game:

1. Sal picks an \\( x\in \bigcup A \\).
2. Kwan must show that there exist some set in \\( B \\) which contains \\( x \\).

Kwan argues that there must exist some \\( a\in A \\) for which \\( x\in a \\). Since \\( A\subseteq B \\), Kwan also points out that \\( a\in B \\). Thus, \\( a \\) is a set in \\( B \\) which contains \\( x \\). \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.3 If every member of \\( A \\) is a subset of \\( B \\), i.e, if for all \\( a\in A, \ a\subseteq B \\), then \\( \bigcup A\subseteq B \\).

Proof. Let \\( x\in \bigcup A \\) be arbitrary, then there must exist an \\( a\in A \\) for which \\( x\in a \\). By assumption \\( a\subseteq B \\), so it must be that \\( x\in B \\). \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.4 For any set \\( A \\), we have \\( \bigcup[\mathcal{P}(A)]=A \\).

Proof. By the previous theorem, since every member of \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \\) is a subset of \\( A \\), we have \\( \bigcup[\mathcal{P}(A)]\subseteq A \\), this is the first part done. The second part is also easy, since \\( A \\) is a subset of itself, we have \\( A\in \mathcal{P}(A) \\), and using theorem 1.2.1 we obtain \\( A\subseteq \bigcup[\mathcal{P}(A)] \\). \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.5 For any set \\( A \\), we have \\( A\subseteq \mathcal{P}(\bigcup A) \\).

Proof. Choose a point \\( x\in A \\), if we can show that \\( x\in \mathcal{P}(\bigcup A) \\) then we are done. Notice that this is equivalent to showing that \\( x \\) is a subset of \\( \bigcup A \\), but this fact is immediate from theorem 1.2.1. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.6 For any sets \\( A,B \\), we have \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \cap \mathcal{P}(B) = \mathcal{P}(A\cap B} \\).

Proof. Choose \\( x\in \mathcal{P}(A) \cap \mathcal{P}(B) \\), then \\( x\subseteq A \land x\subseteq B \\), check that this means \\( x\subseteq A\cap B \\) is true, thus \\( x\in \mathcal{P}(A\cap B) \\). The reverse implication is similar. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.7 For any sets \\( A,B \\), we have \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \cup \mathcal{P}(B) = \mathcal{P}(A\cup B} \\).

Proof. Similar to above. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.8 For any set \\( B \\), if \\( a\in B \\), then \\( \mathcal{P}(a)\in \mathcal{P}[\mathcal{P}(\bigcup B)] \\).

Proof. This is equivalent to showing that \\( \mathcal{P}(a) \\) is a subset of \\( \mathcal{P}(\bigcup B) \\). So, let \\( x\in \mathcal{P}(a) \\), we need to show that \\( x\in \mathcal{P}(\bigcup B) \\), but this is equivalent to showing that \\( x\subseteq \bigcup B \\). Given \\( a\in B \\), here is the game:

1. Sal chooses an \\( x\in P(a) \\)
2. Kwan needs to show that \\( x\subseteq \bigcup B \\)

Kwan starts with the obvious fact that \\( x\subseteq a \\). Next, since \\( a\in B \\), Kwan invokes theorem 1.2.1 to show that \\( a\subseteq \bigcup B \\). Thus, \\( x\subseteq a\subseteq \bigcup B \\), and by transitivity of the subset relation we have \\( x\subseteq \bigcup B \\) as desired. \\( \Box \\)

> Claim. For any set \\( A \\), \\( A\cap \varnothing= \varnothing \\)

Proof. Suppose there exists an element, \\( x\in A\cap \varnothing \\), then this implies that \\( x\in A \\) **and** \\( x\in \varnothing \\), as we all know, the latter is impossible, so \\( A\cap \varnothing=\varnothing \\) as desired. \\( \Box \\)
