---
published: true
title: 'Chapter 1.2 [Excursions] II'
layout: post
date: '2021-08-20 15:56:07 +0700'
categories: misc
permalink: '/:categories/2'
---
{% include katex.html %}

## Metric Preserving Functions

For any metric space \\( (M,d) \\), a function \\( f:[0,\infty) \to [0,\infty) \\) is said to be metric preserving if \\( f\circ d \\) is a metric on \\( M \\). Sometimes we will write \\( d_f \\) instead of \\( f\circ d \\) for simplicity.

> Unless otherwise specified, anytime a function is mentioned it is to be understood that it has domain \\( [0,\infty) \\) and codomain \\( [0,\infty) \\). 

There is an easy way to determine whether or not a function is metric preserving, we simply need to check if the following properties are satisfied:

- \\( f(x)=0 \\) if and only if \\( x=0 \\).
- \\( f \\) is increasing.
- \\( f \\) is subadditive.

> For those unfamiliar with subadditivity, a function is said to be subadditive if 
\\[ f(x+y)\leq f(x)+f(y), \\]
for all \\( x,y \\) in the domain of \\( f \\).

Recall that a metric needs to satisfy [three properties](https://awelson.github.io/MathBlog/metric-space-topology/2). It is easy to see that the first condition in the list ensures that the first property of the metric is satisfied, the other two conditions on the list ensures that the triangle inequality (third property) holds. Meanwhile, the second property of the metric is automatically/immediately satisfied. We shall only prove that the last two conditions imply the triangle inequality. 

Proof. Let \\( (M,d) \\) be a metric space. For any \\( x,y,z\in M \\), we have \\( d(x,z)\leq d(x,y)+d(y,z) \\), and since \\( f \\) is increasing and subadditive,

\\[ d_f(x,z)\leq f(d(x,y)+d(y,z))\leq d_f(x,y)+d_f(y,z). \\]

Thus, \\( d_f \\) satisfies the triangle inequality. \\( \Box \\)

### Concave Functions

> Definition. We say that a function \\( f \\) is concave if given any \\( t\in [0,1] \\), we have
\\[ f(tx+(1-t)y)\geq tf(x)+(1-t)f(y). \tag{1} \\]
for all \\( x,y \\) in the domain of \\( f \\).

An example of a concave function is \\( f(x)=\sqrt{x} \\),

Proof. We need to show that for any \\( t\in [0,1] \\) and \\( x,y\in [0,\infty) \\), 

\\[ \sqrt{tx+(1-t)y}\geq t\sqrt{x}+(1-t)\sqrt{y}. \tag{2} \\]

By AM-GM, we have \\( \frac{x+y}{2}\geq \sqrt{xy} \\), multiplying by \\( 2t(1-t) \\) gives

\\[ t(1-t)(x+y)\geq 2t(1-t)\sqrt{x}\sqrt{y}. \\]

Note: \\( 2t(1-t)\geq 0 \\) because \\( t\in [0,1] \\). We will now add \\( t^2x+(1-t)^2y \\) on both sides, after simplification, this results in

\\[ tx+(1-t)y\geq t^2x+2t(1-t)\sqrt{x}\sqrt{y}+(1-t)^2y. \\]

Taking the square root on both sides gives us (2) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

Why are we talking about concave functions? Well, it turns out that if \\( f \\) is a concave functions and \\( f(x)=0 \\) if and only if \\( x=0 \\), then \\( f \\) is metric preserving, to prove this it suffices to show that \\( f \\) is both increasing and subadditive.

> Claim. \\( f \\) is subadditive

Proof. By letting \\( y=0 \\) in (1) we obtain \\( f(tx)\geq tf(x) \\) for any \\( x\in [0,\infty) \\) and \\( t\in [0,1] \\).

Let \\( x,y \\) be arbitrary points in \\( [0,\infty) \\), then we can set \\( t=\frac{x}{x+y}\in[0,1] \\), 

- Caution. If both \\( x,y=0 \\) then \\( t \\) is not defined, fortunately \\( f(x+y)\leq f(x)+f(y) \\) is immediately true if this is the case.

\\[ \begin{align\*} f(x)&=f(t(x+y))\geq tf(x+y) \newline f(y)&=f((1-t)(x+y))\geq (1-t)f(x+y)\end{align\*} \\]

Therefore, 

\\[ f(x)+f(y)\geq tf(x+y)+(1-t)f(x+y)=f(x+y). \\]

> Claim. \\( f \\) is increasing

Proof. Suppose there exists \\( x_1,x_2\in [0,\infty) \\) such that \\( x_1<x_2 \\) and \\( f(x_2)<f(x_1) \\), then we need to derive a contradiction. There are two cases, either \\( x_1=0 \\) or \\( 0<x_1 \\). The first case implies \\( f(x_2)<0 \\) which is impossible. We now consider the second case: it is easy to verify that 

\\[ 0<\frac{f(x_2)}{f(x_1)}=t<1, \quad \quad 0<\frac{x_2f(x_1)-x_1f(x_2)}{f(x_1)-f(x_2)}=x_3 \\]

Because \\( f \\) is concave, we have

\\[ f(tx_1+(1-t)x_3)\geq tf(x_1)+(1-t)f(x_3), \\]

which simplifies to 

\\[ f(x_2)\geq f(x_2)+(1-t)f(x_3) \quad \Longrightarrow \quad 0\geq f(x_3). \\]

\\( f(x_3)<0 \\) is impossible, so that leaves \\( f(x_3)=0 \\), but this implies \\( x_3=0 \\) which is a contradiction. \\( \Box \\)

Since \\( f(x)=\sqrt{x} \\) is concave and \\( \sqrt{x}=0 \\) if and only if \\( x=0 \\), then the square root function is metric preserving. This gives us a new metric on the real numbers, where the distance between \\( x,y\in \mathbb{R} \\) is given by

\\[ d(x,y)=\sqrt{\|x-y\|}. \\]

It took significant work to show that \\( f(x)=\sqrt{x} \\) is concave, however there is an easier method to determine if a function is concave with the help of differentiation, we will come to this at a later point.

