---
published: true
layout: post
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/3'
---
{% include katex.html %}

Just like we can add two numbers to create a new one, we can take two sets, take their union and create a new one. There is a similar underlying structure. So far we only have \\( cup \\) and \\( cap \\) as binary operations on sets, let us introduce a new one: For any two sets \\( A,B \\), define:

\\[ A-B=\\{x\in A \ \vert \ x\notin B\\}. \\]

(this exists via axiom of specification) The set \\( A-B \\) contains the elements of \\( A \\) that are not contained in \\( B \\), likewise, \\( B-A \\) represents the elements of \\( B \\) that are not in \\( A \\). Notice that \\( A-B \\) being equal to \\( B-A \\) is not necessarily true, for example, if \\( A=\\{a,b\\} \\) and \\( B=\\{b,c\\} \\), then \\( A-B=\\{a\\} \\) and \\( B-C=\\{c\\} \\). This contrasts with \\( cup \\) and \\( cap \\), notice that for any \\( A,B \\):

\\[ A\cup B=B\cup A, \quad A\cap B=B\cap A. \\]

Although we haven't formally proven the above, this is extremely obvious. This shows that \\( \cup \\) and \\( cap \\) are commutative operations. They are also associative: for any \\( A,B,C \\),

\\[ A\cup (B\cup C)=(A\cup B)\cup C, \quad A\cap (B\cap C)=(A\cap B)\cap C. \\]

The above is also obvious and we will not show a proof. What is less obvious is the distributive property of \\( cup \\) and \\( cap \\): for any \\( A,B,C \\),

\\[ A\cap (B\cup C)=(A\cap B)\cup (A\cap C), \quad A\cup (B\cap C)=(A\cup B)\cap (A\cup C). \\]

Let us prove the first of these identities, I will leave the second one up to you:

Proof. Here is the first game:

1. Sal picks a point \\( x\in A\cap (B\cup C) \\)
2. Kwan has two win conditions, he can either show that \\( x\in A\cap B \\) or that \\( x\in A\cap C \\)

Kwan points out that \\( x\in A \\) is true, thus the win condition is now to either show that \\( x\in B \\) or that \\( x\in C \\). Kwan points out that \\( x\in B\cup C \\) is also true, thus either \\( x\in B \\) or \\( x\in C \\) as desired.

Game 2:

1. Sal picks a point \\( x\in (A\cap B )\cup (A\cap C) \\)
2. Kwan has two win conditions: 1. show that \\( x\in A \\) 2. show either \\( x\in B \\) or \\( x\in C \\)

Kwan points out that there are two possibilities, either \\( x\in A\cap B \\) or \\( x\in A\cap C \\). Suppose that \\( x\in A\cap B \\), then \\( x\in A \\) and \\( x\in B \\), both conditions are satisfied. If instead \\( x\in A\cap C \\), then \\( x\in A \\) and \\( x\in C \\), both conditions are satisfied as well. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.3.1 [De Morgan's Laws] For any 3 sets \\( A,B,C \\):
\\[ C-(A\cup B)=(C-A)\cap (C-B), \quad C-(A\cap B)=(C-A)\cup (C-B). \\]

Proof. Game 1:

1. Sal picks a point \\( x\in C-(A\cup B) \\)
2. Kwan has two win conditions: 1. show that \\( x\in C-A \\) 2. show that \\( x\in C-B \\)

Kwan notices it must be that \\( x\in C \\) and \\( x\notin A\cup B \\), but notice that

\\[ x\notin A\cup B=\neg(x\in A\cup B)=\neg(x\in A \ \lor \ x\in B)=x\notin A \ \land \ x\notin B. \\]


