---
published: true
title: Chapter 1.3 Sequences
layout: post
date: '2021-09-11 15:56:07 +0700'
categories: Metric-Space-Topology
permalink: '/:categories/3'
---
{% include katex.html %}

A sequence from a set \\( M \\) is a list \\( (x_1,x_2,\ldots) \\), where \\( x_n\in M \\) for each \\( n \\). In writing, we shorten \\( (x_1,x_2,\ldots) \\) into \\( (x_n) \\) and attach (if necessary) \\( \subseteq M \\) infront of a sequence to indicate that it is from the set \\( M \\).

Sometimes, a sequence follows a specific pattern, in other words, we can derive a formula to give the \\( n^{\text{th}} \\) term of a sequence. We attach \\( x_n=\text{formula}(n) \\) infront of a sequence to indicate this pattern. For example: \\( (x_n)\subseteq \mathbb{R}, \ x_n=n^2 \\) denotes the sequence \\( (1,4,9,\ldots) \\). In this case, \\( \subseteq \mathbb{R} \\) is not needed because it is super clear that \\( (x_n) \\) is a sequence of real numbers. 

### Convergence

> Definition. A sequence \\( (x_n)\subseteq M \\) is said to be convergent in the metric space \\( M \\) if there is a point \\( x\in M \\) such that for any \\( \epsilon>0 \\), we can find an \\( N\in \mathbb{N} \\) for which
\\[ d(x_n,x)<\epsilon, \quad \text{for all }n\geq N. \\]
If this is the case, we say that \\( (x_n) \\) converges to \\( x \\) in \\( M \\). We will use the notation \\( \lim{(x_n)}=x \\) or \\( (x_n)\to x \\) to indicate this. If no such \\( x\in M \\) exists, then we say that the sequence is divergent. 

We can express this in terms of a game: A sequence \\( (x_n)\subseteq M \\) converges to a point \\( x \\) in \\( M \\) if and only if Kwan can develop a winning strategy for the following game:

- Sal chooses a positive real number, \\( \epsilon>0 \\).
- In response, Kwan needs to come up with a number, \\( N\in \mathbb{N} \\).
- If \\( d(x_n,x)<\epsilon \\) is true for all \\( n\geq N \\), then Kwan wins, otherwise, Sal wins.

But what does it mean for \\( (x_n) \\) to converge to \\( x \\) anyway? Suppose \\( (x_n)\to x \\) were true, then Kwan can win the game no matter what number Sal chooses in the first move. For example, if Sal chooses the number \\( \epsilon=0.001 \\), Kwan can employ a strategy to find a number \\( N\in \mathbb{N} \\) for which \\( d(x_n,x)<0.001 \\) is true for all \\( n\geq N \\). This statement indicates to us that the points in the sequence from \\( x_N \\) onwards are all really close to the point \\( x \\). The cool thing is, we don't need to stop at \\( \epsilon=0.001 \\), Sal can keep choosing a smaller and smaller value, but Kwan will still win the game anyway. 

Intuitively, the converge of a sequence \\( (x_n) \\) to a point \\( x \\) means that the tail end of \\( (x_n) \\) gets arbitrarily close to the point \\( x \\).

For example, consider the sequence \\( (x_n)\subseteq \mathbb{R}, \ x_n=1/n \\). To say that \\( (x_n)\to 0 \\) is not a dumb guess, so let's verify it! We need a winning strategy for Kwan, lets say Sal chooses a number \\( \epsilon>0 \\), how can Kwan use this information to produce a suitable \\( N \\)? Well, we need

\\[ \|1/n-0\|=1/n<\epsilon, \quad \text{for all }n\geq N. \\]

This is equivalent to needing \\( n>1/\epsilon \\) for all \\( n\geq N \\), and this can be achieved if \\( N>1/\epsilon \\). This will be our winning strategy: if Sal chooses a number \\( \epsilon>0 \\), then all Kwan needs to do is to pick a natural number that is larger than \\( 1/\epsilon \\). For example, if Sal chooses \\( \epsilon=0.1 \\), Kwan can pick the number 11, and it is easy to verify that 1/11, 1/12, ... are all within a 0.1 distance of the point 0.

### Caution.

When talking about convergence, it is important to specify the metric space in which a sequence converges in. For example, the sequence \\( (x_n), \ x_n=1/n \\) converges to \\( 0 \\) in \\( \mathbb{R} \\) if it is paired with the euclidean 1-metric, however, the same is not true if we pair \\( \mathbb{R} \\) with the discrete metric. If \\( d \\) is the discrete metric, then Kwan does not have a guaranteed victory, for example, if Sal chooses \\( \epsilon=1 \\), then Kwan needs to choose an \\( N \\) that satisfies

\\[ d(x_n,0)<\epsilon=1, \quad \text{for all }n\geq N \\]

However, since \\( d(x_n,0)=1 \\) for all \\( n \\), the above is same as saying

\\[ 1<1, \quad \text{for all }n\geq N \\]

Regardless of whatever \\( N \\) Kwan comes up with, the inequality is false, so Sal wins. The point is: simply stating that \\( (x_n)\to x \\) is ambiguous, because, while it may be clear which set the sequence \\( (x_n) \\) is from, it may not be clear which metric on \\( M \\) we are currently using, and as we just have shown, different metrics leads to different convergence properties.


