---
published: true
title: Chapter 1.2 Metric Spaces
layout: post
date: '2021-08-19 15:56:07 +0700'
categories: Metric-Space-Topology
permalink: '/:categories/2'
---
{% include katex.html %}

We will now discuss metric spaces. The word 'metric' is another way to say distance, so we may think of a metric space as a set of points with a notion of distance. What we mean by a notion of distance boils down to the existence of a function that defines a distance between any two points of the set in terms of a real number. Henceforth, we come up with the following definition:

> Definition 1.2.1 A metric space is the pair \\( (M,d) \\), where \\( M \\) is a set and \\( d:M\times M\to \mathbb{R} \\) is a function that takes in any two points of \\( M \\) and outputs a real number, since this number is meant to represent the distance between those two points, it is pertient that \\( d \\) should satisfy the following rules:
- \\( d(x,x)=0, \quad \\) for any \\( x\in M. \\)
- \\( d(x,y)=d(y,x), \quad \\) for any \\( x,y\in M. \\)
- \\( d(x,z)\leq d(x,y)+d(y,z), \quad \\) for any \\( x,y,z,\in M. \newline \newline \\) 
If a function satisfies these rules, it is said to be a metric on \\( M \\). The third rule in particular is important, it is known as the triangle inequality.

**Example.** The set \\( \mathbb{R} \\) along with the function \\( d:\mathbb{R}^2\to \mathbb{R} \\) defined by \\( d(x,y)=\|x-y\| \\) forms a metric space. Notice that \\( d \\) represents our standard/familiar way of calculating the distance between any two real numbers. We will now verify whether or not the way we have been doing things constitutes a valid metric on \\( \mathbb{R} \\).

> Claim 1. \\( d \\) is a metric on \\( \mathbb{R} \\).

Proof. It is easy to show that \\( d \\) satsifies the first two rules. For the third rule, we need to prove that

\\[ \|x-z\|\leq \|x-y\|+\|y-z\|, \quad \text{for any }x,y,z\in M. \\]

Let us first prove the simpler, \\( \|a+b\|\leq \|a\|+\|b\|, \ a,b\in \mathbb{R}. \\) Notice that

\\[ \begin{align\*} -\|a\|&\leq a\leq \|a\| \newline -\|b\|&\leq b\leq \|b\| \end{align*} \\]

Adding gives

\\[ -(\|a\|+\|b\|)\leq a+b\leq \|a\|+\|b\| \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad \|a+b\|\leq \|a\|+\|b\|. \\]

Now, make the substitution \\( a=x-y \\) and \\( b=y-z \\), this completes the proof. \\( \Box \\)

**Example.** Consider \\( \mathbb{R}^2 \\), we are also familiar with a method of measuring distances between points of this set. Via pythagoras, we derive a metric \\( d:\mathbb{R}^2\times \mathbb{R}^2\to \mathbb{R} \\), where if \\( x=(x_1,x_2) \\) and \\( y=(y_1,y_2) \\), then \\( d(x,y)=\sqrt{\|x_1-x_2\|^2+\|y_1-y_2\|^2} \\).

- Derive a 'familiar' metric for \\( \mathbb{R}^3 \\), generalize this to \\( \mathbb{R}^n \\)
- This 'familiar' metric for measuring distances between points of \\( \mathbb{R}^n \\) is known as the Euclidean \\(n-\\)metric. Unless otherwise specified, whenever we use \\( \mathbb{R}^n \\) as a metric space, it is to be assumed that \\( \mathbb{R}^n \\) is paired with the Euclidean n-metric.
- We will prove that the euclidean \\(n-\\)metric satisfies the triangle inequality in a future post. For now, we will just have to be satisfied with knowing that this is true for \\( n=1 \\) (Claim 1). 




