---
published: true
---
{% include katex.html %}

> Definition. A function is a relation \\( R \\) such that for every \\( x\in \text{dom }R \\), there is only one \\( y\in \text{im }R \\) such that \\( xRy \\). Additionally, a function may be paired/assigned a codomain, this can be any set \\( B \\) such that \\( \text{im }R\subseteq B \\).

We can create a function as follows, first: choose a set \\( A \\), then second: provide instructions to assign/transform every element of \\( A \\) into some other. The function will then consist of ordered pairs with elements of \\( A \\) in the first coordinate, and the result of the transformation in the second coordinate. For example if \\( A=\\{1,2,3\\} \\) and the transformation is that of squaring the number, then the resulting function, \\( f \\) is

\\[ f=\\{ <1,1>,<2,4>,<3,9> \\}. \\]

Here are some points to consider:

- The set, \\( A \\), that we chose in the first step will become the domain of \\( f \\). Really then, the first step of creating a function is to choose what its domain will be.
- Some transformations instructions may not result in a function, for example, if \\( A=\\{1\\} \\) and the instruction is to assign 1 to the number 2 and also to the number 3, then the resulting function is given by \\( \\{<1,2>,<1,3>\\} \\), but this relation does not satisfy the required conditions to be a function. We don't have to be wary of making such transformations, they are very easy to spot and notice.


> Notation. If \\( f \\) is a function and \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\), then we shall let \\( f(x) \\) denote whatever is the result of transforming \\( x \\) with the function \\( f \\). Note that if \\( f \\) is not a function, but instead a relation, then this notation makes no sense. For example, if
\\[ f=\\{ <1,2>,<1,3> \\} \\]
then \\( f(1) \\) can either be 2 or 3, the notation becomes ambiguous.

> Notation. The above notation is useful for communicating instructions without being too descriptive, for example instead of saying "let the transformation be that of squaring the number" we can write "let \\( f(x)=x^2 \\)".

- Transformation instructions need not necessarily send one type of objects to the same type, for example, the function that is assigned the domain \\( \mathbb{R} \\) and the instruction \\( f(x)=<x,x+1> \\) transforms a real number into an object of type \\( \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} \\), that is, into an ordered pair of real numbers.

> Notation. Let \\( f \\) be a function, we write \\( f:A\to B \\) to indicate that the domain of \\( f \\) is \\( A \\), and that we have assigned \\( B \\) as its codomain.

### Surjective/Onto Functions

> Definition. Let \\( f:A\to B \\) be a function, we say that it is surjective/onto if \\( \text{im }f=B \\). Note that the property of surjectivity is only given to functions which has been assigned a codomain, otherwise, it is not possible to determine whether or not a function is surjective.

Given a function \\( f \\), assigning it the codomain \\( \text{im }f \\) automatically makes it surjective. The problem often lies with explicitly calculating what the image of \\( f \\) is. For example, let \\( f(x)=x^2 \\) with the domain \\( [-1,2] \\), you can draw a graph and find that the image is \\( [0,4] \\), but let us formally prove this.

Proof. Choose some \\( y\in \text{im }f \\), then there exists some \\( x\in [-1,2] \\) such that \\( x^2=y \\). Now we prove \\( x^2\in [0,4] \\) (instead of \\( y\in [0,4] \\)). It is clear that \\( x^2\geq 0 \\), so it suffices to prove that \\( x^2\leq 4 \\). Suppose \\( x^2>4 \\), then \\( x>2 \\), but this is impossible since \\( x\in [-1,2] \\).

Choose some \\( y\in [0,4] \\), now we need to find some \\( x\in [-1,2] \\) for which \\( x^2=y \\). Letting \\( x=+\sqrt{y} \\) works, furthermore, since \\( 0\leq y\leq 4 \\), we have \\( 0\leq +\sqrt{y}\leq 2 \\). \\( \Box \\)

Thus, we may conclude that \\( f:[-1,2]\to [0,4] \\) with \\( f(x)=x^2 \\) is surjective.

### Injective/One-to-one Functions

> Definition. Let \\( R \\) be a relation, then we say that it is single-rooted if for each \\( y\in \text{im }R \\) there is only one \\( x \\) such that \\( xRy \\) (or \\( R(x)=y \\) if \\( R \\) is a function). If a function is single-rooted, we say it is injective/one-to-one, notice that it is not neccessary to assign a codomain to determine whether or not a function is injective, this contrasts with surjectivity.

Example: The function \\( f(x)=x^2 \\) with domain \\( \mathbb{R} \\) is not injective because \\( 4\in \text{im }f \\) but \\( f(-2)=f(2)=4 \\), there are 2 elements in the domain of \\( f \\) which maps to 4. It turns out that if we change the domain of \\( f \\) into \\( [0,\infty) \\) instead then the function does become injective.

> Alternate Definition. A function is injective iff for any \\( x_1,x_2\in \text{dom }f \\) such that \\( f(x_1)=f(x_2) \\) we must have \\( x_1=x_2 \\).






