---
published: true
layout: post
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/7'
---
{% include katex.html %}

We have been using numbers without first properly defining them in a set-theoretic manner. This will change as of right now. After a series of posts, you will hopefully be convinced that numbers can and do exist in a set-theoretic universe, and by numbers I mean sets which behave the way we want them to (with regards to arithmetic).

We shall define numbers recursively as follows:

1. The empty set, \\( \varnothing \\) is a number
2. If \\( n \\) is a number, then the next number, \\( n^+ \\) is given by: \\( n^+=\\{n\\}\cup n \\)

For example, the next number after \\( \varnothing \\) is 

\\[ \varnothing^+=\\{\varnothing\\}\cup \varnothing=\\{\varnothing\\}. \\] 

The number after \\( \varnothing^+ \\) is 

\\[ \varnothing^{++}=\\{\\{\varnothing\\}\\}\cup \\{\varnothing\\}=\\{\\{\varnothing\\},\varnothing\\}. \\] 

and so on... we can keep going and going. Instead of using \\( \varnothing, \ \varnothing^+, \ldots \\) to label our numbers, we use something more familiar instead: \\( 0,1,2,\ldots \\). I.e, we have the relabelling:

\\[ \varnothing=0, \quad \varnothing^+=1, \quad \varnothing^{++}=2,\quad \cdots \\]

> Theorem 2.1.1 If \\( n \\) is a number, then \\( n\in n^+ \\). Similarly, \\( n\subseteq n^+ \\).

Proof. Notice that \\( n\in \\{n\\}\cup n \\) and \\( n\subseteq \\{n\\}\cup n \\). It's almost as if \\( n^+ \\) was deliberately constructed just to fulfill this property!

The first part of Theorem 2.1.1 tells us:

\\[ 0\in 1\in 2\in 3\in \cdots \\]


The second part tells us:

\\[ 0\subseteq 1\subseteq 2 \subseteq 3 \subseteq \cdots \\]

Combining the two theorems above give us 

> Corollary 2.1.1.1 If \\( n\neq 0 \\) is a number, then it contains all the numbers before it.

Proof. Let \\( b \\) be a number that is before \\( n \\), then:

\\[ b\in b^+\subseteq \cdots \subseteq n \quad \Longrightarrow \quad b\in n \\]

If \\( b^+=n \\), then \\( b\in n \\) is obvious. \\( \Box \\)

In fact for any \\( n\in \omega \\) we have \\( n^+=\\{0,1,\ldots,n\\} \\). We prove this later on.

### Inductive Sets

We say that a set \\( A \\) is inductive if \\( 0=\varnothing\in A \\), further, if \\( a\in A \\) we must have \\( a^+\in A \\) (where \\( a^+=\\{a\\}\cup a \\), borrowing the notation from before). With the axioms we have currently, we cannot prove that an inductive set exists. To mitigate this problem, we create an axiom that guarantees the existence of an inductive set:

> Infinity Axiom. There exists an inductive set:
- \\( \exists A \ [\varnothing \in A \ \land \ (\forall a\in A)a^+\in A] \\)

We call it the infinity axiom because any inductive set has (at minimum) infinite members, it contains:

\\[ \varnothing, \quad \varnothing^+, \quad \varnothing^{++}, \quad \cdots \\]

and so on. We exploit this property to provide a formal definition for what a number is:

> Definition. A set, \\( n \\), is a number if it is contained in every inductive set. In other words a set \\( n \\) is a number if: \\( \forall A \ [A\text{ is inductive } \Longrightarrow \ n\in A] \\).

We now show that a set, \\( \omega \\), consisting precisely of all numbers exists.

> Claim. \\( \omega \\) exists. 

Proof. Let \\( A \\) be an inductive set. We know \\( A \\) exists by the infinity axiom. It is clear that \\( \omega\subseteq A \\), so all we have to do is filter all the numbers from the set \\( A \\). We can do so with the axiom of specification: Let

\\[ \omega=\\{ x\in A \ \vert \ x \ \text{is in every inductive set} \\}. \quad \Box \\]

Of course,

\\[ \omega=\\{\varnothing, \varnothing^+, \varnothing^{++}, \ldots\\}=\\{0,1,2,\ldots\\}. \\]

Now we will show that \\( \omega \\) itself is inductive.

> Theorem 1.2.2 \\( \ \omega \\) is inductive. 

Proof. Clearly \\( \varnothing\in \omega \\). Now suppose Sal chooses an \\( n\in \omega \\). Kwan will have to show that \\( n^+\in \omega \\). Kwan can do this by showing that \\( n^+ \\) is a number, i.e, that \\( n^+ \\) is in every inductive set. Kwan asserts that this is indeed true.

To test Kwan's assertion, Sal chooses an inductive set, \\( A \\), asking Kwan to show that \\( n^+\in A \\). Kwan begins by noting that \\( n\in A \\) (because \\( n \\) is a number). Next, since \\( A \\) is inductive, we have \\( n^+\in A \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

It is easy to see that \\( \omega \\) is the smallest inductive set.

> Claim. If \\( A\subseteq \omega \\) is inductive, then \\( A=\omega \\).

To prove this, it suffices to show that \\( \omega\subseteq A \\), but this is obvious.

### Induction Explained

We can use the idea of inductive sets to explain the process of induction. Say we wish to show that a statement \\( P \\) holds for every number, i.e, that \\( \forall n\in \omega, \ P(n) \\), then this is equivalent to showing that \\( T=\\{n\in \omega \ \vert \ P(n)\\}=\omega \\).

If we manage to show that \\( T\subseteq \omega \\) (this is trivial) and that \\( T \\) is inductive, this would prove \\( T=\omega \\) as needed. Let us show a simple example.

> Claim. For every \\( n\in \omega \\), we have the equality \\( n^+=\\{0,1,\ldots,n\\} \\).

Proof. Set \\( P(n) \\) to mean that \\( n^+=\\{0,1,\ldots,n\\} \\) holds. Then set

\\[ T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ P(n) \\} \\]

We shall show that \\( T \\) is inductive. First, we need to show that \\( 0\in T \\), i.e, that \\( P(0) \\) holds. Since \\( \varnothing^+=\\{\varnothing\\} \\), we are done. Now suppose that \\( k\in T \\), we need to show that \\( k^+\in T \\), i.e, that \\( P(k^+) \\) holds true. Since \\( k\in T \\), we know that

\\[ k^+=\\{0,1,\ldots,k\\} \\]

so taking its successor gives

\\[ k^{++}=\\{k^+\\}\cup k^+=\\{0,1,\ldots,k,k^+\\} \\]

so \\( P(k^+) \\) holds true as we need it to be. \\( \Box \\)

You are probably more familiar with having \\( n=1 \\) as the base case instead of \\( n=0 \\) as we did over here. We can switch base cases but that comes with a slight change of results. With base case \\( n=0 \\), the statement is true for \\( 0,1,2,\ldots \\). With base case \\( n=1 \\), the statement is true for \\( 1,2,3,\ldots \\). The previous sentence is true intuitively, but we must verify that this is actually the case.

> Claim. To prove that \\( P \\) is true for \\( 1,2,3,\ldots \\), it suffices to show that
\\[ T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ P(n^+) \\} \\]
is inductive.

Proof. Note, if \\( T \\) is inductive, then \\( T=\omega \\). Now suppose \\( n\in \omega - \\{0\\} \\). Our goal is to show that \\( P(n) \\) holds. Let \\( b \\) be the number directly before \\( n \\). Notice that since \\( b\in \omega=T \\), we know that \\( P(b^+)=P(n) \\) is true. \\( \Box \\)

Letting \\( T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ P(n^+) \\} \\) has the effect of switching the base case from 0 to 1. Why? The base case is to show that \\( 0\in T \\), but in this specific scenario \\( 0\in T \\) amounts to showing that \\( P(0^+)=P(1) \\) is true.

Of course we can use other base cases, for example \\( n=4 \\). We just have to extend our reasoning.

### Does \\( \omega \\) really represent numbers?

We basically just pulled a set out of our asses, called it \\( \omega \\) and unanimously decided that this set is gonna play the role that numbers play. How do we know that it's gonna do that job properly? What if there is some other set \\( A \\) that would do a better job than \\( \omega \\)?

Of course we didn't just construct \\( \omega \\) randomly, this set was carefully designed so that it would behave as expected. For example, the way we constructed \\( \omega \\) made it so that it would be the smallest inductive set, and this allows induction to work on \\( \omega \\) in exactly the same fashion that induction works on numbers.

But there are other properties to check to make sure that \\( \omega \\) will be able to perfectly play the role that numbers do. These properties were given by Peano in 1889. They are known as Peano's postulates:

> A prerequisite before we get into what the postulates are: If \\( S \\) is a function and \\( A\subseteq \text{dom }S \\), then we say that \\( A \\) is closed under \\( S \\) if whenever \\( x\in A \\) we have \\( S(x)\in A \\) (notice that this is equivalent to saying that \\( S[A]\subseteq A \\)).

A Peano system is a triplet \\( <N,S,e> \\) consisting of a set \\( N \\), a function \\( S:N\to N \\), and a member \\( e\in N \\) that satisfies Peano's postulates:

- \\( e\notin \text{ran }S \\)
- \\( S \\) is one-to-one
- If \\( A\subseteq N \\) is closed under \\( S \\) and \\( e\in N \\), then \\( A=N \\)

Let us define a function \\( \sigma \\) as:

\\[ \sigma=\\{<n,n^+> \ \vert \ n\in \omega\\} \\]

It maps a number to its successor. We will show that \\( <\omega, \sigma, 0> \\) forms a Peano system

> Theorem 1.2.3 \\( <\omega,\sigma,0> \\) forms a Peano system.

Proof. First note that \\( 0\in \sigma \\) and \\( \sigma:\omega\to \omega \\), these are obvious. Now let us show that \\( 0\notin \text{ran }\sigma \\). If it were, then there would exist an \\( n\in \omega \\) such that \\( n^+=\\{n\\}\cup n=\varnothing \\), notice that it is impossible for such an \\( n \\) to exist.

Now suppose \\( A \\) is a subset of \\( \omega \\) that is closed under \\( \sigma \\) and \\( 0\in A \\). If we can show that for any \\( n\in A \\), we have \\( n^+\in A \\), then that would make \\( A \\) inductive, so by principle of induction, \\( A=\omega \\). Since \\( A \\) being closed under \\( \sigma \\) is equivalent to \\( \forall n\in A, \ n^+\in A \\), we have exactly what we need.

The final part is to show that \\( \sigma \\) is one-to-one. We'll introduce a concept in order to make this task simpler:

We say that a set \\( A \\) is transitive if

\\[ x\in a\in A \quad \Longrightarrow x\in A \\]

The following are also equivalent reformulations:

\\[ \begin{align\*} \bigcup A&\subseteq A \newline a\in A \quad &\Longrightarrow \quad a\subseteq A \newline A&\subseteq \mathcal{P}(A) \end{align\*} \\]

These reformulations are really easy to prove. We talked about transitivity earlier when we were dealing with equivalent relations, this has nothing to do with the transitivity that we are dealing with now. It is unfortunate that we have conflicting terminology, but it should be obvious by context which kind of transitivity we are talking about.

> Lemma 1.2.4 \\( \bigcup (A\cup B)=\bigcup A\cup \bigcup B \\)

Proof. Since \\( A\subseteq A\cup B \\), we have \\( \bigcup A\subseteq \bigcup (A\cup B) \\) by theorem 1.2.2. Similarly, \\( \bigcup B \subseteq \bigcup (A\cup B) \\). Combining, we obtain \\( \bigcup A\cup \bigcup B\subseteq \bigcup (A\cup B) \\). This is one half of the proof done.

For the other half, we shall employ theorem 1.2.3. Let \\( x\in A\cup B \\), then it suffices to show that \\( x\subseteq \bigcup A\cup \bigcup B \\). To that end,

\\[ \begin{align\*} x\in A\cup B \quad &\Longrightarrow x\in A \ \lor \ x\in B \newline &\Longrightarrow x\subseteq \bigcup A \ \lor \ x\subseteq \bigcup B \quad \text{Theorem 1.2.1} \newline &\Longrightarrow x\subseteq \bigcup A\cup \bigcup B. \quad \Box \end{align\*} \\]

> Theorem 1.2.5 If \\( a \\) is a transitive set, then \\( \bigcup a^+=a \\)

Proof. 

\\[ \begin{align\*} \bigcup a^+ &= \bigcup (a\cup \\{a\\}) \newline &=\bigcup a \cup \bigcup \\{a\\} \newline &= \bigcup a \cup a =a. \end{align\*} \\]

The second step is given by the lemma. The last step is because \\( \bigcup a\subseteq a \\) since \\( a \\) is transitive. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.6 Every number is a transitive set

Proof. If we form \\( T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ n \text{ is transitive } \\} \\), then it suffices to show that \\( T \\) is inductive. First, \\( 0\in T \\) because \\( \varnothing \\) is trivially transitive. Now suppose \\( k\in T \\). We need to show that \\( k^+\in T \\), i.e, that it is transitive, to do this, we show that \\( \bigcup k^+\subseteq k^+ \\). This is obvious because

\\[ \overbrace{\bigcup k^+=k}^{\text{Theorem 1.2.5}}\subseteq k^+. \quad \Box \\]

We can now complete the proof of theorem 1.2.3. Suppose there are \\( n,m\in \omega \\) such that \\( \sigma(n)=\sigma(m) \\), then

\\[ n^+=m^+ \quad \Longrightarrow \quad \bigcup(n^+)=\bigcup(m^+) \quad \Longrightarrow \quad n=m \\]

This proves that \\( \sigma \\) is one-to-one. \\( \Box \\)

We will now show that \\( \omega \\) itself is a transitive set.

> Theorem 1.2.7 \\( \omega \\) is transitive

Proof. We shall show that \\( \forall n\in \omega, \ n\subseteq \omega \\) (this is the third reformulation of transitivity). To do this we form the set \\( T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ n\subseteq \omega \\} \\), and we will show that \\( T \\) is inductive.

Clearly \\( 0\in T \\) because \\( \varnothing \subseteq \omega \\). Now suppose \\( k\in T \\), then we have \\( k\subseteq \omega \\) by assumption and also \\( k\in \omega \ \rightarrow \ \\{k\\}\subseteq \omega \\). Thus, \\( k^+=k\cup \\{k\\}\subseteq \omega \\), showing that \\( k^+\in T \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

### Tid-Bits

> Theorem 1.2.8 If \\( a \\) is a transitive set, then \\( a^+ \\) is also transitive

Proof. We will show that \\( \bigcup a^+ \subseteq a^+ \\) (second reformulation). By Theorem 1.2.5, we have \\( \bigcup a^+=a\subseteq a^+ \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.9 \\( a \\) is a transitive set if and only if \\( \mathcal{P}(a) \\) is a transitive set

Proof. We do the forward direction first. To show that \\( \mathcal{P}(a) \\) is transitive, we may show that \\( \mathcal{P}(a)\subseteq \mathcal{P}[\mathcal{P}(a)] \\). Choose an \\( x\in \mathcal{P}(a) \\), then \\( x\subseteq a \\). Since \\( a \\) is transitive, we have \\( x\subseteq a \subseteq \mathcal{P}(a) \\). Thus, \\( x\in \mathcal{P}[\mathcal{P}(a)] \\) as needed.

We now prove the reverse. We need to show that \\( a\subseteq P(a) \\). Since \\( P(a) \\) is transitive, we know that \\( \bigcup P(a)\subseteq P(a) \\), but theorem 1.2.4 states that \\( \bigcup P(a)=a \\) so we are done. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.10 If \\( a \\) is a transitive set, then \\( \bigcup a \\) is also transitive

Proof. We shall show that \\( \bigcup a \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\bigcup a) \\). By theorem 1.2.5 we know that \\( a\subseteq \mathcal{P}(\bigcup a) \\), and because \\( a \\) is transitive we know that \\( \bigcup a\subseteq a \\). Combining, we obtain \\( \bigcup a \subseteq a \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\bigcup a) \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.2.11 This is the converse of theorem 1.2.5. We shall show that if \\( \bigcup a^+=a \\), then \\( a \\) is transitive.

Proof. To do this we will show that \\( \bigcup a\subseteq a \\). Note that

\\[ \begin{align\*} \bigcup a^+&=\bigcup(a\cup \\{a\\}) \newline &=\bigcup a \cup \bigcup \\{a\\} \newline &=\bigcup a \cup a \newline &= a \end{align\*} \\]

Remember, the last line is because \\( \bigcup a^+=a \\) by assumption. From this, we easily obtain \\( \bigcup a \subseteq a \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)
