---
published: true
---
{% include katex.html %}

Note that this is a deviation to how things are normally done, but I do believe that this has some merit. We shall introduce a new axiom, not part of ZFC:

> Axiom of Ordered Pairs. If \\( x \\) and \\( y \\) are sets (or ordered pairs), we may form the object: \\( <x,y> \\), known as the ordered pair.

The ordered pair is an object that satisfies \\( <x,y>=<u,v> \\) iff \\( x=u \\) and \\( y=v \\). In particular, this means that \\( <x,y>\neq <y,x> \\) (unless \\( x=y \\)). This is why ordered pairs are called ordered pairs, the order matters. Contrast this to sets: \\( \\{x,y\\}=\\{y,x\\} \\) even for distinct \\( x \\) and \\( y \\). 

There are also operations we can perform on ordered pairs. For any ordered pair \\( <x,y> \\), we have:

\\[ \text{fst}(<x,y>)=x, \quad \text{and} \quad \text{snd}(<x,y>)=y. \\]

fst takes an ordered pair and outputs the first of the two sets that make up the pair; snd outputs the second. The idea of ordered triples, quadruples, etc.. can be built from the idea of ordered pairs. For example, we can simply define the ordered triple as

\\[ <x,y,z>=\<\<x,y>,z>. \\]

Note that our axiom allows us to create ordered pairs with ordered pairs. Similarly, operations on the ordered triple can be built out of operations on the ordered pair. For example, the 'thd (third)' operation on an ordered triple is

\\[ \text{thd}(<x,y,z>)=\text{snd}(\<\<x,y>,z>)=z. \\]

The 'snd' operation on an ordered triple is

\\[ \text{snd}(<x,y,z>)=\text{snd}\circ \text{fst}(\<\<x,y>,z>)=y. \\]

Note that the snd operation on the left is different to the snd operation on the right. One acts on ordered triples and the other acts on ordered pairs. Try to figure out how the fst operation on triples can be constructed from the pair operations!

> Note. All of this is possible to do without introducing a new 'type' of object. We can construct pairs of objects with ZFC rules that exhibit the same properties shown here. I just think it is more convenient to introduce a new 'type' of object.

### Cartesian Product

> Definition. For any two sets \\( A \\) and \\( B \\), the cartesian product \\( A\times B \\) is the set
\\[ A\times B=\\{ <x,y> \ \vert \ x\in A \ \land \ y\in B \\} \\]

In other words, it is the set of all possible combinations of elements of \\( A \\) and \\( B \\) paired up together (with elements of \\( A \\) in the first coordinate and \\( B \\) in the second). For example, if \\( A=\\{1,2\\} \\) and \\( B=\\{3,4\\} \\), then

\\[ A\times B=\\{<1,3>,<1,4>,<2,3>,<2,4>\\}. \\]

Try and write down \\( B\times A \\) explicitly like the above!

Obviously \\( A\times B \\) cannot be constructed from the axioms of ZFC. There is no rule stating that we are allowed to construct sets containing ordered pairs in them. We shall create a new axiom ensuring that this is possible

> Product Axiom. For any sets \\( A \\) and \\( B \\), there exists a set \\( A\times B \\) such that
\\[ x\in A\times B \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad x\text{ is an ordered pair } \ \land \ \text{fst}(x)\in A \ \land \ \text{snd}(x)\in B \\]

### Relations

We now define relations:

> A relation is a set \\( R \\) such that \\( \forall x\in R. \ x \text{ is an ordered pair} \\). In other words, a relation is a set of ordered pairs.

Note. It is clear that \\( A\times B \\) is a relation, and so is any subset of \\( A\times B \\). In fact, \\( R \\) is a relation iff there exists \\( A \\) and \\( B \\) such that \\( R\subseteq A\times B \\). We may in fact use this as the definition of a relation instead.

For example,

\\[ R=\\{<1,3>,<1,-4>,<0,0>\\} \\]

is an example of a relation. Notice that \\( R\subseteq \omega\times \omega \\) so by the axiom of speicification, it is constructible. 

\\( R \\) is, however, a quite useless relation as it is just a meaningless collection of pairs of numbers. In defence, we could have more meaningful relations if we wanted to, for example:

\\[ R'=\\{<1,2>,<1,3>,<2,3>\\}. \\]

If \\( x,y\in \\{1,2,3\\} \\), then this relation allows us to determine whether or not \\( x<y \\). To do so, simply check whether or not \\( <x,y>\in R' \\). In particular, for all \\( x\in R' \\), \\( \text{fst}(x)<\text{snd}(x) \\). This is an example of an ordering relation, it provides information on how the elements of \\( \\{1,2,3\\} \\) should be ordered. We'll talk more about ordering relations later on.

> Note. Sometimes we write \\( xRy \\) or \\( x \\) maps to \\( y \\) in place of \\( <x,y>\in R \\). These two are basically interchangable. Note in the '\\( x \\) maps to \\( y \\)' example, the relation is not explicitly specified, we only use this if the relation can be gathered from context.

### Relations via statements

Given two sets \\( A, B \\) a relation \\( R \\) can be created by specifying a statement \\( S \\) (which involves an \\( x\in A \\) and \\( y\in B \\)) and asserting that \\( xRy \\) iff \\( S(x,y) \\) is satisfied. In other words:

\\[ R=\\{ z\in A\times B \ \vert \ S(\text{fst}(z),\text{snd}(z)) \\} \\]

For example, if we let our two sets be \\( \\{1,2,3\\} \\) and \\( S(x,y) \ \leftrightarrow \ x=y+1 \\). Then the relation generated from these conditions would look like:

\\[ R=\\{<2,1>,<3,2>\\}. \\]

In practice we will say something like: Let \\( A=\\{1,2,3\\} \\) and \\( R\subseteq A\times A \\) be defined by \\( xRy \\) iff \\( \ \ \ x=y+1 \\).

### Domain and Range

We define the domain of a relation \\( R \\) (\\( \text{dom }R \\)) as the set containing the first coordinates of all the ordered pairs in \\( R \\), i.e, if

\\[ R=\\{<x_1,y_1>,<x_2,y_2>,\cdots\\} \quad \Longrightarrow \quad \text{dom }R=\\{x_1,x_2,\ldots\\} \\]

and the range of \\( R \\) (\\( \text{ran }R \\)) as the same with the domain, but with the second coordinate instead of the first (sometimes we say image instead of range (and by extension, \\( \text{im }R \\) instead of \\( \text{ran }R \\), this is typically the case when we talk about functions). There is also the field of \\( R \\) (\\( \text{fld }R \\)) which we define as the union between \\( \text{dom }R \\) and \\( \text{ran }R \\).

This definition can be made more formal as follows:

> Definition. If \\( R\subseteq A\times B \\) is a relation then define
\\[ \text{dom }R=\\{ z\in A \ \vert \ \exists x\in R. \ \text{fst}(x)=z \\} \quad \text{and} \quad \text{ran }R=\\{ z\in B \ \vert \ \exists x\in R. \ \text{snd}(x)=z \\}. \\]

The idea is: if \\( R \\) is a relation, then by definition there must exist sets \\( A \\) and \\( B \\) such that \\( R \subseteq A\times B \\). We then use the set \\( A \\), applying the axiom of specification to obtain \\( \text{dom }R \\). The same with \\( B \\). 

However, informally speaking:

\\[ \text{dom }R=\\{ \text{fst}(x) \ \vert \ x\in R \\} \quad \text{and} \quad \text{ran }R=\\{ \text{snd}(x) \ \vert \ x\in R \\}. \\]

### Functions

We briefly talk about them here, however a full overview is given later. A function is a special case of a relation. Whenever a relation \\( R \\) satisfies the following:

\\[ \forall x,y\in R. \ \text{fst}(x)=\text{fst}(y) \ \Longrightarrow \ \text{snd}(x)=\text{snd}(y) \\]

it can be regarded as a function. For example,

\\[ R=\\{<1,1>,<1,2>,<4,3>\\} \\]

is not a function because \\( \text{fst}(<1,1>)=\text{fst}(<1,2>) \\) but \\( \text{snd}(<1,1>)\neq \text{snd}(<1,2>) \\). However \\( R'=\\{<1,1>,<4,3>\\} \\) is a function. Simply, we need it so that \\( R \\) maps an \\( x\in \text{dom }R \\) uniquely to a \\( y\in \text{ran }R \\). In the example that fails (to be a function), \\( 1 \\) is mapped to two different points: to itself and to \\( 2 \\).

### Constructing a function

To construct a function \\( f \\), there are two ingredients. First, we need to choose a set that shall act as the domain of \\( f \\). Then we need to specify a transformation that acts on elements from the chosen domain. The resulting function will then look like

\\[ f=\\{ <x,T(x)> \ \vert \ x\in \text{dom }f \\} \\]

where \\( T(x) \\) is the result of applying a transformation to an \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\). This transformation has to be unique, i.e, a transformation cannot have two different results. Here is an example of this procedure: Take \\( \\{1,2,3\\} \\) to be our domain and let our transformation be that of doubling of numbers, then our function would look like:

\\[ F=\\{<1,2>,<2,4>,<3,6>\\} \\]

Sometimes a transformation is hard to write down. So we may write \\( 'f(x)=2x' \\) in place of "the transformation is that of doubling of numbers". To practice, write down what a function \\( f \\) with domain \\( \\{0,3,-3\\} \\) and transformation \\( f(x)=x^2 \\) would look like!

> This is an important concept. If I wish to talk about or introduce a specific function, then instead of writing it down explicitly, I can just simply mention its domain and transformation, and that would be sufficient for the audience to understand. For example, instead of writing down: let \\( F \\) be the function
\\[ \\{<x_1,y_1>,<x_2,y_2>,\cdots\\} \\]
I can instead write down: let \\( F \\) be the function with domain \\( A \\) and transformation \\( T \\). Both these ways of describing a function works, but the second is obviously better.

We can also transform based on cases. For example, set \\( \\{1,2,3,4\\} \\) to be our domain, then we can write

\\[ f(x)=\begin{cases} 0 &\text{if } x\leq 2 \newline x &\text{otherwise} \end{cases} \\]

There are two transformations here: either turn it into 0, or do nothing. Which transformation is applied to an \\( x\in \\{1,2,3,4\\} \\) depends on whether or not \\( x\leq 2 \\). Try and write this function down explicitly.

It is also important to note that functions aren't restricted to converting between objects of the same type. For example we can have a function \\( f \\) with domain \\( \omega \\) and \\( f(x)=<x,x> \\). The transformation here is one that converts elements of \\( \omega \\) into elements of \\( \omega\times \omega \\). For example, \\( <1,<1,1\>\> \\) would be an example of a member of \\( f \\).

> Notation. If \\( F \\) is a function and \\( x\in \text{dom }F \\) then we shall let \\( F(x) \\) denote the unique \\( y\in \text{ran }F \\) for which \\( xFy \\) holds. Note that if \\( F \\) is not a function, but instead a relation, then this notation makes no sense. For example, if
\\[ F=\\{<1,2>,<1,3>\\} \\]
then \\( F(1) \\) can either be \\( 2 \\) or \\( 3 \\). The notation becomes ambiguous. Functions, by design, don't suffer from this same problem. It is guaranteed by definition that \\( F(x) \\) has one possible value: the unique \\( y\in \text{ran }F \\) for which \\( xFy \\) holds.

Let us prove a rather obvious fact just for practice. If \\( f \\) is a function, then \\( f(x)\in \text{ran }f \\) for all \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\). Suppose \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\), then \\( <x,f(x)>\in f \\) and \\( \text{snd}(<x,f(x)>)=f(x)\in \text{ran }f \\).

The other direction also works: If \\( y\in \text{ran }f \\) then \\( y=f(x) \\) for some \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\). By definition we know there is some \\( z\in f \\) with \\( \text{snd}(z)=y \\). We propose that \\( y=\text{snd}(z)=f(\text{fst}(z)) \\). This is obvious because \\( z=<\text{fst}(z),\text{snd}(z)>\in f \\). This completes the proof. We are now tempted to write (informally) that:

\\[ \text{ran }f=\\{ f(x) \ \vert \ x\in \text{dom }f \\} \\]

We also have the fact that two functions \\( f \\) and \\( g \\) with same domain are equal iff \\( f(x)=g(x) \\) for all \\( x \\) in the domain. Suppose \\( z\in f \\), then \\( z=<x,f(x)> \\) for some \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\), but since \\( \text{dom }f=\text{dom }g \\) we have \\( <x,g(x)>\in g \\) but since \\( g(x)=f(x) \\), we have \\( z\in g \\) as needed. The proof for \\( z\in g \ \rightarrow z\in f \\) follows similarly.

Now suppose that \\( f \\) and \\( g \\) are equal. Let \\( D \\) be the common domain between \\( g \\) and \\( f \\). Suppose \\( x\in D \\), then we have both \\( <x,f(x)>\in f \\) and \\( <x,g(x)>\in g \\). Since \\( f \\) and \\( g \\) are equal, we cannot have \\( f(x)\neq g(x) \\) because then \\( x \\) would be mapped to two different points. This completes the proof.

### The identity function

For any set \\( A \\), there is a function \\( id_A \\) with domain \\( A \\) and \\( id_A(x)=x \\). For example, if \\( A=\\{1,2,3\\} \\), then 

\\[ id_A=\\{ <1,1>,<2,2>,<3,3> \\} \\]

It is a function with a blank transformation.

### Codomain

This is a difficult concept to wrap around. The way I like to think about it is, if something like \\( f:A\to B \\) shows up this means: \\( f \\) is a function along with the added info that \\( \text{dom }f=A \\) and that \\( \text{ran }f\subseteq B \\) (or alternatively: \\( f(x)\in B \\) for all \\( x\in \text{dom }R \\)). If \\( f:A\to B \\), then the set \\( B \\) is said to be the codomain of \\( f \\), but this is misleading because the codomain doesn't depend on \\( f \\) at all, the codomain can literally be anything as long as \\( \text{ran }f \\) is a subset of it. The range of \\( f \\) is in this sense the smallest possible codomain of \\( f \\). 

> Note. A function and its codomain are not bound such that whenever one mentions a function, its codomain needs to be made clear too. Mentioning the codomain of a function is optional, if the fact that \\( f(x)\in B \\) for all \\( x \\) in the domain is necessary in some proof or explanation, then the writer will make it clear that \\( f \\) has codomain \\( B \\), otherwise there is no need to mention the codomain.

> Theorem. If \\( f:A\to B \\) and \\( B\subseteq C \\) then \\( f:A\to C \\). 

Proof. Showing that \\( f:A\to C \\) means three things: showing that \\( f \\) is a function, showing that it has domain \\( A \\) and showing that \\( \text{ran }f\subseteq C \\). The first two are obvious. For the third, notice that since \\( f \\) has codomain \\( B \\), we have \\( \text{ran }f\subseteq B\subseteq C \\). \\( \Box \\)

We can think of \\( A\to B \\) as the set of functions with domain \\( A \\) and codomain \\( B \\). More formally:

\\[ A\to B=\\{ f\in \mathcal{P}[A\times B] \ \vert \ f\text{ is a function, }\text{dom }f=A, \ \text{ran }f\subseteq B \\} \\]

So that when we say \\( f:A\to B \\) we really mean \\( f\in A\to B \\). The theorem we just proved also turns into: \\( A\to B\subseteq A\to C \\) if \\( B\subseteq C \\). As practice, try and list out all the elements of \\( \\{1\\}\to \\{a,b\\} \\).

Now here is an interesting question. Does the set \\( \varnothing\to \varnothing \\) have an element? The only candidate that makes sense is \\( \varnothing \\), but is the empty set even a function to begin with? Well, since \\( \varnothing \subseteq A\times B \\) for whatever sets \\( A \\) and \\( B \\) it certainly is a relation. Furthermore it satisfies (vacuously) the required property to be classed as a function. Now, what would be its domain? By definition:

\\[ \text{dom }\varnothing= \\{ x\in A \ \vert \ \exists z\in \varnothing. \ \text{fst}(z)=x \\}=\varnothing \\]

Similarly, \\( \text{ran }\varnothing=\varnothing \\). So indeed, \\( \varnothing:\varnothing\to \varnothing \\). Obviously \\( \varnothing \\) is the only element of \\( \varnothing\to \varnothing \\).
