---
published: true
layout: post
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/10'
---
{% include katex.html %}

We revisit the topic of ordering (see chapter 1.6). What is the right way to construct an ordering on \\( \omega \\)? We already know that

\\[ 0\in 1\in 2\in \cdots \\]

so we can maybe let \\( n<m \\) iff \\( n\in m \\) for any \\( n,m\in \omega \\). Thus the ordering relation will look like

\\[ <=\\{<n,m>\in \omega\times \omega \ \vert \ n\in m\\} \tag{1} \\]

so to determine whether \\( 2<5 \\) we need to check if \\( <2,5>\in < \\), i.e, to check if \\( 2\in 5 \\) which it is because \\( \in \\) is transitive. We can define the symbol \\( \leq \\) to mean

\\[ n\leq m \quad \text{iff} \quad n\in m \ \lor \ n=m. \\]

Really we can dispense the \\( < \\) and \\( \leq \\) notation. Whenever we write \\( n\in m \\) it shall be implicitly understood that \\( n \\) is a number that is less than \\( m \\). Similarly in place of \\( \leq \\) we can use \\( \underline{\in} \\).

> Theorem 2.4.1 For any \\( p,k\in \omega \\) we have \\( p\in k^+ \\) iff \\( p \ \underline{\in} \ k \\).

Proof. For the -> direction: \\( p\in k^+=\{k\}\cup k \\), so either \\( p\in k \\) or \\( p\in \{k\} -> p=k \\) as needed. The reverse is similar. \\( \Box \\)

Before continuing we should probably show that (1) satisfies the necessary properties to be considered as linear ordering relation.

> Theorem 2.4.2 (1) is a linear ordering relation.

We need to show two things: 1, for any \\( n,m,p\in \omega \\) we have \\( n<m<p \ \rightarrow \ n<p \\). This collapses into \\( n\in m\in p \rightarrow \ n\in p \\). This is true because \\( \in \\) is transitive. 2, trichotomy. This one is harder to prove, we need the following prerequisites:

> Lemma 2.4.3 For any \\( n,m\in \omega \\) we have \\( m\in n \\) iff \\( m^+\in n^+ \\). Additionally, \\( n\in n \\) is impossible for any \\( n\in \omega \\).

Proof. We prove \\( m^+\in n^+ \ \rightarrow \ m\in n \\). We have \\( m\in m^+ \ \underline{\in} \ n \\). If it is the case that \\( m^+\in n \\), then \\( m\in n \\) by transitivity of \\( n \\). If it is the case that \\( m^+=n \\), then \\( m\in n \\) is obvious.

We prove \\( m\in n \ \rightarrow \ m^+\in n^+ \\) by induction. Form the set

\\[ T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ \forall{m\in n}, \  m^+\in n^+ \\}. \\]

Then \\( 0\in T \\) vacuously. Suppose \\( k\in T \\) and \\( m\in k^+ \\). Then we could have \\( m=k \\), in which case \\( m^+=k^+\in k^{++} \\) so \\( k^+\in T \\). We could also have \\( m\in k \\), in which case, \\( m^+\in k^+ \\) because \\( k\in T \\), and since \\( k^+\in k^{++} \\) we have \\( m^+\in k^{++} \\) by transitivity, so \\( k^+\in T \\) in either case.

Part 2 follows from the claim in the "Induction Explained" section of chapter 2.1. Alternatively we can prove it from part 1 as follows: Let

\\[ T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ n\notin n \\}. \\]

Then obviously \\( 0\in T \\). Suppose \\( k\in T \\). If \\( k^+\in k^+ \\), then by part 1 we have \\( k\in k \\), this is a contradiction, so we must have \\( k^+\notin k^+ \\), i.e, \\( k^+\in T \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

We are now ready to prove trichotomy

> Theorem 2.4.4 For any \\( m,n\in \omega \\) exactly one of
\\[ m\in n, \quad m=n, \quad n\in m \\]
hold.

Proof. To simplify, we write (1), (2), and (3) for the three statements. First note that at most one can hold. If (1) and (2) hold, then this violates part two of the lemma. The same is true if (2) and (3) hold. Finally, if (1) and (3) hold, then by trichotomy we have \\( m\in m \\) which is also in violation of the lemma.

It remains to show that at least one holds. We use induction:

\\[ T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ \forall{m\in \omega} \ m\in n \ \lor \ m=n \ \lor \ n\in m \\}. \\]

We first need to show that \\( 0\in T \\). Let \\( m\in \omega \\), then \\( m\in 0 \\) is impossible, so what's left is to show that either \\( m=0 \\) or \\( 0\in m \\). This is of course obvious. Now assume that \\( k\in T \\). Let \\( m\in \omega \\), then since \\( k\in T \\) we have either \\( m\underline{\in} \ k \\) (in which case \\( m\in k^+ \\)) or \\( k\in m \\). In the latter case we obtain \\( k^+\in m^+ \\) by part 1 of the lemma, this means that \\( k^+\underline{\in} \ m \\). In either case, \\( k^+\in T \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

Thus \\( \in \\) is a linear ordering relation on \\( \mathbb{N} \\).

We now introduce new notation, \\( \subset \\), also known as the proper subset. For any sets \\( A,B \\) let

\\[ A\subset B \quad \text{iff} \quad A\subseteq B \ \land \ A\neq B. \\]

The following is also equivalently true:

\\[ A\subseteq B \quad \text{iff} \quad A\subset B \ \lor \ A=B. \\]

This can be thought of as a stricter version of \\( \subseteq \\), kind of like how \\( < \\) is a stricter version of \\( \leq \\). 

> Theorem 2.4.5 For any \\( m,n\in \omega \\):
\\[ m\in n \ \text{iff} \ m\subset n \quad m\underline{\in} \ n \ \text{iff} \ m\subseteq n. \\]

Proof. Suppose \\( m\in n \\). We know by transitivity of \\( n \\) that \\( m\in n \ \Longrightarrow \ m\subseteq n \\). Part 2 of lemma 2.4.3 disallows \\( n=m \\), hence \\( m \\) has to be a proper subset of \\( n \\). Now suppose \\( m\subset n \\). Then we know that \\( m\neq n \\). We can also rule out \\( n\in m \\) for if it were true then: \\( n\in m\subset n \ \rightarrow \ n\in n \\) which is a contradiction.

The second part is easy, so I will leave it as an exercise. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 2.4.6 For any \\( m,n,p\in \omega \\) we have
\\[ m\in n \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad m+p\in n+p. \\]

Proof. This can be thought of as a more general version of part 1 of lemma 2.4.3. In that case we had \\( p=1 \\). We use induction to prove the forward case. Fix two natural numbers \\( m\in n \\), then let

\\[ T=\\{ p\in \omega \ \vert \ m+p\in n+p \\}. \\]

It is obvious that \\( 0\in T \\), and

\\[ \begin{align\*} k\in T \quad &\Longrightarrow \quad m+k\in n+k \newline &\Longrightarrow \quad (m+k)^+\in (n+k)^+ \tag*{\text{By part 1 of lemma 2.4.3} \newline &\Longrightarrow \quad m+k^+\in n+k^+ \newline &\Longrightarrow \quad k^+\in T. \end{align\*} \\]

For the reverse case, suppose \\( m+p\in n+p \\). Then we cannot have \\( m=n \\) because that implies \\( m+p \\) is contained in itself. We also cannot have \\( n\in m \\) because the forward case gives \\( n+p\in m+p\in n+p \\). By trichotomy, the only option left is \\( m\in n \\), which is what is needed. \\( \Box \\)





