---
published: true
---
{% include katex.html %}

Now we may begin to talk about functions in more depth. Note, we will switch to using image instead of range as this is the more commonly accepted terminology when dealing with functions. There are two important properties relating to functions that one must understand. First is injectivity.

> Definition. We say that a function \\( f \\) is injective if for any \\( x,y\in \text{dom }f \\) we have \\( f(x)=f(y) \ \rightarrow \ x=y \\).

An alternative way to put it is, for any \\( y\in \text{ran }f \\) there must exist only one \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\) such that \\( f(x)=y \\). The equivalence between these two statements is somewhat obvious.

> Example 1. The function \\( f \\) with domain \\( \mathbb{R} \\) and \\( f(x)=x^2 \\) is not injective.

This is because \\( f(-2)=f(2)=4 \\) but obviously \\( -2\neq 2 \\). However, if \\( f \\) had the domain \\( \mathbb{R}^+ \\) (the set of all positive real numbers) instead, then \\( f \\) would be injective.  

> Example 2. The function \\( f \\) with domain \\( \mathbb{R} \\) and \\( f(x)=x+1 \\) is injective.

Suppose we are given \\( x,y\in \mathbb{R} \\) such that \\( f(x)=f(y) \\). This means that \\( x+1=y+1 \\), but if so, subtracting by 1 on both sides yields \\( x=y \\).

Next is surjectivity.

> Definition. If \\( f:A\to B \\), then we say that \\( f \\) is surjective if \\( B=\text{im }f \\). Alternatively, \\( f \\) is surjective if for any \\( y\in B \\) there exists an \\( x\in A \\) for which \\( f(x)=y \\) holds.

Surjectivity is a property that is only assigned to functions whose codomain has been made explicit, otherwise it wouldn't make sense to ask whether or not that function is surjective. A surjective function is easy to create, for example, let \\( f:A\to \text{im }f \\). Then \\( f \\) is automatically surjective. 

> Example 1. \\( f:[-1,2]\to [0,4] \\) with \\( f(x)=x^2 \\) is surjective.

Choose a \\( y\in [0,4] \\). Clearly \\( \sqrt{y}\in A \\) and also \\( f(\sqrt{y})=y \\) so \\( f \\) is indeed surjective.

The idea of injectivity (but not surjectivity) can be generalized to relations.

> Let \\( R \\) be a relation, then \\( R \\) is injective if for any \\( y\in \text{ran }R \\) there only exists one \\( x\in \text{dom }R \\) for which \\( xRy \\) holds true. In other words \\( R \\) is injective iff \\( x_1Ry \ \land \ x_2Ry \ \rightarrow x_1=x_2 \\).

### Inverse

> Let \\( R \\) be a relation, then the inverse relation \\( R^{-1} \\) is defined as follows
\\[ R^{-1}=\\{ <\text{snd}(z),\text{fst}(z)> \ \vert \ z\in R \\} \\]

This is an informal definition, but a formal one does exist, it is just tedious to write down. For example, if \\( R=\\{ <1,7>,<2,7> \\} \\), then \\( R^{-1}=\\{ <7,1>,<7,2> \\} \\). Notice that \\( R \\) is a function but \\( R^{-1} \\) is not, it is just a relation. It is not necessary for the inverse of a function to be a function.

> Theorem 1.5.1. \\( \text{ran }R^{-1}=\text{dom }R \\). Similarly, \\( \text{dom }R^{-1}=\text{ran }R \\).

Proof. 

\\[ \begin{align\*} \text{ran }R^{-1}&=\\{ \text{snd}(\bar{z}) \ \vert \ \bar{z}\in R^{-1} \\} \newline &=\\{ \text{snd}(<\text{snd}(z),\text{fst}(z)>) \ \vert \ z\in R \\} \newline &=\\{ \text{fst}(z) \ \vert \ z\in R \\} \newline &= \text{dom }R. \end{align\*} \\]

For \\( \text{dom }R^{-1}=\text{ran }R \\) the proof follows similarly. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.5.2 A relation \\( R \\) is injective iff \\( R^{-1} \\) is a function. Similarly, \\( R \\) is a function iff \\( R^{-1} \\) is injective.

Proof. Suppose \\( <y,x_1>,<y,x_2>\in R^{-1} \\). To show that \\( R^{-1} \\) is a function we need to show that \\( x_1=x_2 \\). We have \\( <x_1,y>, <x_2,y> \in R \\), but by injectivity of \\( R \\) we must have \\( x_1=x_2 \\). The other direction follows similarly.

Suppose \\( <y_1,x>,<y_2,x>\in R^{-1} \\). To show that \\( R^{-1} \\) is injective we need to show that \\( y_1=y_2 \\). We have \\( <x,y_1>,<x,y_2>\in R \\), but since \\( R \\) is a function we have \\( y_1=y_2 \\). The other direction follows similarly. \\( \Box \\)

Notice that this theorem shows that \\( R \\) is an injective function iff \\( R^{-1} \\) is an injective function.

> Theorem 1.5.3 \\( (R^{-1})^{-1}=R \\)

Proof. This is obvious. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.5.4 Let \\( F \\) be an injective function. If \\( x\in \text{dom }F \\), then \\( F^{-1}(F(x))=x \\). If \\( y\in \text{im }F \\) then \\( F(F^{-1}(y))=y \\).

Proof. First notice that by theorem 1.5.2 \\( F^{-1} \\) is also an injective function, so the notation makes sense. We have \\( <x,F(x)>\in F \\), and thus \\( <F(x),x>\in F^{-1} \\), so \\( F^{-1}(F(x))=x \\).

Suppose \\( y\in \text{im }F \\), then \\( y\in \text{dom }F^{-1} \\). We use the first part of theorem to obtain \\( (F^{-1})^{-1}(F^{-1}(y))=y \\), but since \\( (F^{-1})^{-1}=F \\) we have what we need. \\( \Box \\)

### Composition

> Definition. If \\( G \\) and \\( F \\) are relations, then we define the composition of those two relations, \\( F\circ G \\) to be
\\[ F\circ G=\\{ <\text{fst}(z_1),\text{snd}(z_2)> \ \vert \ z_1\in G, \ z_2\in F, \ \text{snd}(z_1)=\text{fst}(z_2) \\} \\]

For example,

\\[ G=\\{<1,7>,<2,8>\\}, \quad F=\\{<7,3>,<2,4>\\} \quad \Longrightarrow \quad G\circ F=\\{<1,3>\\} \\]

> Note. if \\( x(F\circ G)y \\), we can conclude that there is a \\( t\in \text{im }G \cap \text{dom }F \\) such that \\( xGt \ \land \ tFy \\). The other way works as well, if we can show that there exists a \\( t \\) such that \\( xGt \ \land tFy \\), then \\( <x,y> \\) is in the composition.	

> Theorem 1.5.5 If \\( G \\) and \\( F \\) are functions, then \\( F\circ G \\) is also a function.

Proof. Suppose that we have \\( x(F\circ G)y_1 \\) and \\( x(F\circ G)y_2 \\). This implies that there must exist \\( t \\) and \\( t' \\) such that

\\[ xGt \ \land tFy_1, \quad \text{and}\quad xGt' \ \land \ t'Fy_2 \\]

Since \\( G \\) is a function, we must have \\( t=t' \\). Repeating the same argument for \\( F \\), we must have \\( y_1=y_2 \\). This confirms that \\( F\circ G \\) is a function.

If \\( G,F \\) (and by extension \\( F\circ G \\)) are functions, it is clear that we must have \\( \[F\circ G\](x)=F(G(x)) \\) for all \\( x \\) in the domain of \\( F\circ G \\), which begs the question: What is its domain? Well, we would need \\( x\in \text{dom }G \\) and furthermore \\( G(x)\in \text{dom }F \\). Thus,

\\[ \text{dom }F\circ G=\\{ x\in \text{dom }G \ \vert \ G(x)\in \text{dom }F \\} \\]

The above formula can actually be proved, but it is quite tedious to do so. We'll just leave it at that. 

> Theorem 1.5.6 If \\( G:A\to B \\) and \\( F:B\to C \\) then \\( F\circ G:A\to C \\).

That \\( F\circ G \\) is a function is already given by theorem 1.5.5. By definition,

\\[ \text{dom }F\circ G=\\{ x\in A \ \vert \ G(x)\in B \\} \\]

but \\( G(x)\in B \\) is satisfied by all \\( x\in A \\) since \\( G:A\to B \\). Thus the domain of the composite is \\( A \\). Further, it is clear that \\( \[F\circ G\](x)=F(G(x))\in C \\) (since \\( F:B\to C \\)) for all \\( x\in A \\). Thus \\( F\circ G:A\to C \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.5.6 If \\( F \\) and \\( G \\) are relations, then
\\[ (F\circ G)^{-1}=G^{-1}\circ F^{-1} \\]

Proof. \\( <x,y>\in (F\circ G)^{-1} \\) is equivalent to

\\[ \begin{align\*} <y,x>\in F\circ G \quad &\Longleftrightarrow \quad yGt \ \land \ tFx \newline &\Longleftrightarrow \quad xF^{-1}t \ \land \ tG^{-1}y \newline &\Longleftrightarrow \quad <x,y>\in G^{-1}\circ F^{-1}. \quad \Box \end{align\*} \\]

### The Arrow Interpretation

It is about time that we introduce the arrow interpretation for relations/functions. This will allow us to represent proofs/ideas about relations in a graphical manner. If we wish to represent the following statement: \\( 'xRy' \\) in a graphical manner, we do so by writing

\\[ x\stackrel{R}{\to} y \\]

We can also express proofs and statements. For example, \\( xRy \ \leftrightarrow \ yR^{-1}x \\) becomes

\\[ x\stackrel{R}{\to} y \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad y\stackrel{R^{-1}}{\to} x \\]

We can also represent composition in this manner. \\( x(F\circ G)y \\) is equivalent to:

\\[ x\stackrel{G}{\to} t\stackrel{F}{\to} y \\]

where \\( t \\) is some element from \\( \text{im }G \cap \text{dom }F \\). Let us redo the proof of theorem 1.5.6 in this manner

> Theorem 1.5.6 If \\( F \\) and \\( G \\) are relations, then
\\[ (F\circ G)^{-1}=G^{-1}\circ F^{-1} \\]

Proof. Suppose \\( <x,y>\in (F\circ G)^{-1} \\), this is equivalent to

\\[ y\stackrel{G}{\to} t\stackrel{F}{\to} x \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad y\stackrel{G^{-1}}{\leftarrow} t\stackrel{F^{-1}}{\leftarrow} x\\]

which means \\( <x,y>\in G^{-1}\circ F^{-1} \\). \\( \Box \\)

It looks better doesn't it? Here is another proof.

> Theorem 1.5.7 The compositions of injective relations is again injective.

Proof. Suppose \\( F,G \\) are injective. 
