---
published: true
layout: post
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/8'
---
{% include katex.html %}

We wish to answer the following question: Suppose we are given a set \\( A \\), an element \\( a\in A \\), and a function \\( F:A\to A \\). Can we find a function \\( h:\omega\to A \\) such that (1) \\( h(0)=a \\) and (2) \\( h(n^+)=F(h(n)) \\) for all \\( n\in \omega \\)? 

Consider the following proposal: We can let

\\[ h=\\{<n,F^n(a)> \ \vert \ n\in \omega\\} \\]

where \\( F^n=\overbrace{F(F(\cdots}^{n\text{ times}}(a))) \\) with \\( F^0=a \\). Clearly \\( h(0)=a \\) and \\( h(n^+)=F(F^n(n))=F(h(n)) \\), so this function satisfies the requirements. The problem with this proposal is that it is not entirely clear if we can explicitly construct the set \\( h \\). If we could, that would mean that we can encode the idea of recursion within set theory. This is possible to do, but to show why is not an easy task.

> Theorem 2.2.1 [Recursion Theorem] Let \\( A \\) be a set, \\( a\in A \\), and \\( F:A\to A \\). Then there exists a unique function \\( h:\omega\to A \\) such that \\( h(0)=a \\) and \\( h(n^+)=F(h(n)) \\) for all \\( n\in \omega \\).

Proof. For the purposes of this section only we shall call a function \\( v \\) acceptable if \\( \text{dom }v\subseteq \omega \\) and \\( \text{ran }v\subseteq A \\), and the following holds:

(i) If \\( 0\in \text{dom }v \\), then \\( v(0)=a \\).

(ii) If \\( n^+\in \text{dom }v \\), then \\( n \\) is also in \\( \text{dom }v \\) and also \\( v(n^+)=F(v(n)) \\).

We can form the collection \\( \mathcal{K} \\) of all possible acceptable functions. This can be done by filtering out what we want from the collection of the subsets of \\( \omega\times A \\), i.e, \\( \mathcal{P}(\omega\times A) \\). Our claim is that \\( h=\bigcup \mathcal{K} \\). Notice that this means \\( <n,y>\in h \\) iff we can find some \\( v\in \mathcal{K} \\) for which \\( v(n)=y \\).

We need to show 4 things: (1) \\( h \\) is a function, (2) \\( h \\) is acceptable, (3) \\( \text{dom }h=\omega \\) and (4) \\( h \\) is unique.

(1) The only reason why \\( h \\) can fail to be a function is if there is \\( v_1,v_2\in \mathcal{K} \\) such that \\( v_1(n)\neq v_2(n) \\) for some \\( n\in \omega \\). This means that both \\( <n,v_1(n)>,<n,v_2(n)>\in h \\), of course for \\( h \\) to be a function, it must not be able to map \\( n \\) to two different points.

We shall prove by induction. Create the set

\\[ T=\\{ n\in \omega \ \vert \ \text{either }n\notin \text{dom }h \text{ or }(\exists! y)<n,y>\in h \\} \\]

It is clear that \\( \text{dom }h\subseteq \omega \\) so if we can show that \\( T=\omega \\), then any \\( n \\) we pick from \\( \text{dom }h \\) should satisfy \\( (\exists! y)<n,y>\in h \\), meaning \\( h \\) is a function as needed.

Suppose \\( 0\in \text{dom }h \\) (if not, then \\( 0\in T \\) is immediate). Now suppose \\( <0,y_1>,<0,y_2>\in h \\), then we can find acceptable functions \\( v_1,v_2 \\) such that \\( v_1(0)=y_1 \\) and \\( v_2(0)=y_2 \\). But \\( y_1=y_2=a \\) by (i). Thus, \\( 0\in T \\).

Now suppose \\( k\in T \\). We need to show that \\( k^+\in T \\). If \\( k^+\notin \text{dom }h \\) then we are done, so assume that \\( k^+\in \text{dom }h \\). Now suppose that \\( <k^+,y_1>,<k^+,y_2>\in h \\), this means that we can find acceptable functions \\( v_1,v_2 \\) such that \\( v_1(k^+)=y_1 \\) and \\( v_2(k^+)=y_2 \\).

We know from (2) that this means \\( k\in \text{dom }v_1, \ \text{dom }v_2 \ \rightarrow \ k\in \text{dom }h \\). This means that \\( k \\) satisfies \\( (\exists! y)<k,y>\in h \\). We also know from (ii) that

\\[ y_1=v_1(k^+)=F(v_1(k)) \quad \text{and} \quad y_2=v_2(k^+)=F(v_2(k)). \\]

We know that \\( v_1(k)=v_2(k) \\) (otherwise \\( k \\) would be mapped to two different points by \\( h \\)), so it stands that \\( y_1=y_2 \\).

(2) Now we show that \\( h \\) is an acceptable function. Both, \\( \text{dom }h\subseteq \omega \\) and \\( \text{ran }h\subseteq A \\) are clear.
