---
published: true
layout: post
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/11'
---
{% include katex.html %}

The 'cardinality' of a set is a way of talking about the size of a set. Intuitively, we can say that \\( \omega \\) is a larger set than, say \\( \\{1,3,5\\} \\), i.e, \\( \text{card }\omega > \text{card }\\{1,3,5\\} \\). The issue arises when we want to compare the cardinality of two infinite sets. This matter is solved by formalizing the notion of cardinality:

> Definition. We say that two sets \\( A \\) and \\( B \\) have equal cardinality iff there exists a bijection \\( f:A\to B \\). We write \\( A\approx B \\) for two sets with equal cardinality

For example, the set \\( \\{1,2,5\\} \\) and the set \\( \\{0,3,7\\} \\) have equal cardinality. The existence of a bijection between these two sets is obvious. Sometimes things get a bit more hazy: the sets \\( \mathbb{N} \\) and \\( \mathbb{N}\times \mathbb{N} \\) have equal cardinality according to our definition, although intuitively the latter is a lot larger than the former. The Cantor Pairing function is one example of a bijection between \\( \mathbb{N^2} \\) and \\( \mathbb{N} \\) (see https://www.math.drexel.edu/~tolya/cantorpairing.pdf).

> Theorem 2.5.1 For any three sets \\( A,B,C \\) the three statements are true:
\\[ A\approx A, \quad A\approx B \ \Longleftrightarrow \ B\approx A, \quad \text{and} \quad A\approx B \ \land \ B\approx C \ \rightarrow A\approx C. \\]

Proof. If we prove this, this means that \\( \approx \\) is an equivalence relation. The first is equivalent to saying that there always exists a bijection from \\( A \\) to itself. Clearly \\( Id_A:A\to A \\) fits the bill. 

The second states that if there exists a bijection \\( f:A\to B \\), then there exists a bijection \\( g:B\to A \\). By Corollary 1.5.4.1, \\( f^{-1} \\) is such a function. 

The third states that if there exists a bijection \\( g:A\to B \\) and a bijection \\( f:B\to C \\), then there exists a bijection \\( h:A\to C \\). We have \\( f\circ g:A\to C \\) by theorem 1.5.6, and by theorem 1.5.8 + 1.5.9, it is bijective. \\( \Box \\)

Our main goal here will be to prove Cantor's theorem: For any set \\( A \\), there is no bijection between \\( A \\) and \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \\). Thus, these two sets don't have the same cardinality. For this, we employ the following lemma:

> Lemma 2.5.2. For any set \\( A \\), there is a bijection between \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \\) and \\( \\{0,1\\}^A \\).

Proof. Recall that \\( A^B \\) is the set of functions \\( f:B\to A \\). A function from \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \\) to \\( \\{0,1\\}^A \\) is essentially an assignment of a subset of \\( A \\) to a function that maps elements of \\( A \\) to either zero or one. We generate this assignment as follows: If \\( S\subseteq A \\), then let \\( H(S) \\) be the function

\\[ H_S(x)=\begin{cases} 1 &\text{ if }x\in S \newline 0 &\text{ otherwise} \end{cases}. \\]

\\( H(S) \\) is known as the characteristic function of \\( S \\). We know that \\( H \\) has to be injective because: Suppose that \\( H_A=H_B \\). If \\( x\in A \\) then \\( H_A(x)=H_B(x)=1 \\), thus it must be that \\( x\in B \\) as well. Similarly, we prove \\( x\in B\to x\in A \\) as well. This all means that \\( A=B \\) as required.

To prove surjectivity: suppose \\( f\in \\{0,1\\}^A \\), then the subset

\\[ S=\\{ x\in A \ \vert \ f(x)=1 \\} \\]

satisfies \\( H_S=f \\). By definition \\( H_S(x)=1 \\) if \\( x\in S \ \Longleftrightarrow \ f(x)=1 \\). Similarly, \\( H_S(x)=0 \\) if \\( x\notin S \ \Longleftrightarrow \ f(x)=0 \\). \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 2.5.2. [Cantor] For any set \\( A \\), there is no bijection between \\( A \\) and \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \\). 

Proof. Suppose there is a bijection from \\( f:A\to \mathcal{P}(A) \\), then there is a bijection \\( e:A\to \\{0,1\\}^A \\) by transitivity. Let \\( s\in \\{0,1\\}^A \\) be defined as follows: \\( s(x)=\neg(\[e(x)\](x)) \\) (where \\( \neg(0)=1 \\) and \\( \neg(1)=0 \\)). Since \\( e \\) is surjective, there exists a \\( y\in A \\) such that \\( e(y)=s \\). 

The contradiction appears if we consider \\( \[e(y)\](y)=s(y)=\neg(\[e(y)\](y)) \\). This is a contradiction because \\( \neg(a)=a \\) is impossible, it has no fixed points. \\( \Box \\)

> Sidenote. A fixed point of a function \\( f \\) is an \\( x\in \text{dom }f \\) such that \\( f(x)=x \\).

Cantor's Theorem actually has a nice generalization, it is known as the Lawvere fixed point theorem:

> Theorem 2.5.3. [Lawvere] For any sets \\( A,B \\), if there is a surjective function \\( e:A\to B^A \\), then every function \\( f:B\to B \\) has a fixed point.

Proof. Let \\( s\in B^A \\) be a function defined by \\( s(x)=f(\[e(x)\](x)) \\). Since \\( e \\) is surjective, there is a \\( y\in A \\) such that \\( e(y)=s \\). Thus, \\( \[e(y)\](y)=s(y)=f(\[e(y)\](y)) \\). So \\( y \\) is a fixed point of \\( f \\). \\( \Box \\)

This theorem has some nice consequences, here is one of them:

> Corollary 2.5.3.1. \\( \omega \not\approx \omega^\omega \\). In other words: \\( \omega \\) does not have the same cardinality as the set of functions mapping from \\( \omega \\) to \\( \omega \\).

Proof. Let \\( A=B=\omega \\) in Lawvere's theorem. Suppose \\( \omega\approx \omega^\omega \\), then there exists a bijection (which clearly is also a surjection) \\( e:\omega\to \omega^\omega \\). This tells us that every function \\( f:\omega\to \omega \\) has a fixed point. But the succesor function \\( \sigma(n)=n^+ \\) clearly has no fixed point; this is a contradiction. \\( \Box \\)

This is a very profound fact. Both \\( \omega \\) and \\( \omega^\omega \\) are infinite sets, but they have different cardinality, they have different sizes. This means that there are different sizes of infinity. The infinity that describes the size of \\( \omega^\omega \\) is different (clearly larger) than the infinity that describes the size of \\( \omega \\).

We present another example of two infinite sets whose cardinalities differ:

> Theorem 2.5.4 \\( \omega\approx \mathbb{R} \\) is impossible.

Proof. Suppose there exists a bijection \\( f:\omega \to \mathbb{R} \\). We shall create a real number \\( z \\) that is not in the image of \\( f \\), this will serve as a contradiction. We create a function \\( g:\omega\to \\{0,1\\} \\) such that \\( g(n)=0 \\) if the \\( n^\text{th} \\) decimal place of \\( f(n) \\) is not equal to 0, otherwise \\( g \\) maps to 1. This makes it so that \\( g(n) \\) is never equal to the nth decimal place of \\( f(n) \\). 

For example, if \\( f(1)=273.42 \\) then \\( g(1)=0 \\) since \\( 4\neq 0 \\), and if \\( f(2)=56.901 \\), then \\( g(2)=1 \\). What if we had \\( f(3)=273.42 \\), then how do we determine \\( g(3) \\)? what is the third decimal place of \\( 273.42 \\)? Well, it would make sense for it to be 0 since

\\[ 273.42=273.420000\cdots \\]

Just imagine adding a trailing zero whenever we encounter a real number with a finite decimal expansion. There could also be cases where

\\[ f(n)=2.999\cdots=3.000\cdots \\]

How do we make a decision? For example what is the 1st decimal point of \\( f(n) \\)? is it 9 or 0? When we encounter a situation like this, just choose one side. For example let us choose 9, then when we encounter the same situation, we remain consistent with our choice and choose 9 again. 

The real number \\( z \\) is constructed as follows:

\\[ z=0.g(1)g(2)g(3)\cdots \\]

We claim that \\( z \\) is not in the image of \\( f \\). Suppose it is, then \\( f(n)=z \\) for some \\( n\in \omega \\). The nth decimal place of \\( z \\) is \\( g(n) \\), which we know can't equal the nth decimal place of \\( f(n) \\) so they can't be the same number. \\( \Box \\)

We haven't formally discussed the real numbers and their decimal representations, so of course there are some gaps and missing details here and there. But we'll let it slide.

### Equivalence Classes of Cardinality?

Theorem 2.5.1 tells us that \\( \approx \\) is an equivalence relation. So if we had a set \\( A \\), we can partition this set into equivalence classes which partitions elements of \\( A \\) according to size (cardinality). Imagine for a second that \\( A \\) is the set of all sets, of course, this is impossible so just imagine. What would the equivalence classes of \\( A \\) look like?

Well, for example,

\\[ A_1=\\{x\in A \ \vert \ x\approx 1\\}=\\{ \\{1\\},\\{a\\},\\{\varnothing\\},\cdots \\} \\]

would be one such equivalence class. It is the collection of all sets for which there exists a bijection to \\( 1=\\{\varnothing\\} \\), i.e, the collection of all sets with 'one thing' in them. There is also \\( A_0=\\{\varnothing\\} \\), the set of all sets with 'nothing' in them, \\( \varnothing \\) can only be in bijection with itself (via the empty set function).

If we keep going, we will eventually classify and group all possible sets based on their size, with each equivalence class representing 'the size'. For example, the equivalence class \\( A_1 \\) represents the concept of having a 'size' of 1 (i.e, a set containing 1 thing in them), while \\( A_0 \\) represent the concept of having a 'size' of 0 (i.e, a set containing nothing in them).

> Definition. We say that a set \\( A \\) is finite if there exists an \\( n\in \omega \\) such that \\( n\approx A \\) holds. Further if \\( m\approx A \\) then we say that \\( A \\) has a cardinality of \\( m \\). Alternatively, we write \\( \|A\|=m \\). 

> This formalizes the notion of 'counting', for example counting how many elements a set \\( A \\) has is equivalent to finding an \\( n\in \omega \\) for which \\( A\approx n \\). This works only if we know \\( A \\) is finite.

There is one issue with this definition, that is, we could maybe have two distinct \\( n,m\in \omega \\) such that \\( n\approx m\approx A \\). So what is the cardinality of \\( A \\)? What is its size? is it \\( n \\) or \\( m \\)? In other words, we need to show that the cardinality of \\( A \\) is unique. Now intuitively \\( n\approx m \\) is impossible if they are distinct numbers, but the proof of this is actually extremely complicated. Before that, let us introduce some convenient notation:

> Notation. Given \\( n,m\in \omega \\) (with \\( n\leq m \\)) we define
\\[ [[n,m]]=\\{ x\in \omega \ \vert \ n\leq x\leq m \\} \\]

In particular, \\( [[0,n]]=n^+ \\) for all \\( n\in \omega \\). At times we shall use the 'list' form to describe numbers whenever it is more appropriate (we are however excluding 0 since that can't be interpreted in 'list' form; it's fine, cases involving 0 are trivial anyways). Now getting back to the proof; it relies on the following:

> Theorem 2.5.5 [The pigeonhole principle] Let \\( n\in \omega \\). A function \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,n]] \\) is injective iff it is surjective.

<!---
Proof. The base case (\\( n=0 \\)) is clear enough. Moving on, suppose that the statement is true for some \\( k\in \omega \\). We need to show that given an injective function \\( f:k^+\to k^+ \\), \\( f \\) is also surjective. There are two cases to consider:

Case 1. Suppose \\( f(x)\in k \\) for all \\( x\in k \\). Then \\( f\restriction_k:k\to k \\), this function is injective via theorem 1.5.10, so by the inductive hypothesis, it is also surjective. This forces \\( f(k)=k \\) because otherwise we would have \\( f(k)\in k \\). By surjectivity of \\( f\restriction_k \\) there must exist an \\( m\in k \\) such that \\( f(m)=f(k) \\), but since \\( f \\) is injective we have \\( m=k \\), this is a contradiction.

Since we now know that \\( f(k)=k \\), we have \\( \text{im }f=k\cup \\{k\\}=k^+ \\), so \\( f \\) is surjective as desired.

Case 2. Suppose there exists a \\( p\in k \\) such that \\( f(p)=k \\). We create a new function \\( \hat{f} \\) with

\\[ \hat{f}(p)=f(k), \quad \hat{f}(k)=f(p)=k, \quad \hat{f}(x)=f(x) \ \text{for all other }x\in k^+ \\]

Notice that \\( \hat{f} \\) still remains injective, we are merely swapping how \\( p \\) and \\( k \\) are being mapped. Thus, \\( \hat{f}:k^+\to k^+ \\) is an injective function satisfying \\( \hat{f}(x)\in k \\) for all \\( x\in k \\). By case 1 \\( \hat{f} \\) is surjective, so \\( \text{im }\hat{f}=k^+ \\). But notice that \\( \text{im }f=\text{im }\hat{f} \\). Thus \\( f \\) itself is also surjective as desired. \\( \Box \\)
-->

The proof is super tedious so I will omit it. I will however show how this theorem can be used to prove that \\( n^+\not\approx m^+ \\) for distinct \\( n,m \\):

Proof. Suppose \\( m<n \\). Let \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,m]] \\) be an arbitrary injective function. Since \\( [[0,m]]\subseteq [[0,n]] \\) we extend the codomain so that we have \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,n]] \\). The pigeonhole principle tells us that \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,n]] \\) is surjective. Thus there exists an \\( x\in [[0,n]] \\) such that \\( f(x)=n \\). The claim that \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,m]] \\) is false now as \\( f(x)=n\notin [[0,m]] \\). Thus there can't exist an injective (hence bijective) function which maps \\( [[0,n]]\to [[0,m]] \\). \\( \Box \\)

We solved a shifted(+1) version of the problem, so we are ignoring cases involving 0. However, this is not a huge deal.

Another corollary to the pigeonhole principle is the following:
- If \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,m]] \\) with \\( m<n \\). Then \\( f \\) can't be injective
- If \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,m]] \\) with \\( n<m \\). Then \\( f \\) can't be surjective

Proof. 1) This is literally the previous proof. 2) Assume that \\( f:[[0,n]]\to [[0,m]] \\) is surjective. Create a new function \\( g:[[0,m]]\to [[0,m]] \\) with \\( g(x)=f(x) \\) if \\( 0\leq x\leq n \\) and \\( g(x)=x \\) if \\( n+1\leq x\leq m \\). It is easy to see that this new function remains surjective. However, it cannot be injective. The surjectivity of \\( f \\) implies that there exists an \\( p\in [[0,n]] \\) such that \\( f(p)=m \\). However, \\( f(p)=g(p)=g(m)=m \\) but \\( p\neq m \\). At the same time, pigeonhole principle implies that \\( g \\) is injective. This is a contradiction. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 2.5.6 No finite set has the same cardinality with a proper subset of itself

Proof. Let \\( A \\) be a finite set and \\( B\subset A \\). Assume there exists a bijection \\( f:A\to B \\). Since \\( A \\) is finite, there is a bijection \\( g:A\to [[0,n]] \\) for some \\( n\in \omega \\). Consider the function \\( \kappa=g\circ f\circ g^{-1}:[[0,n]]\to [[0,n]] \\). As a composition of injective functions, it is injective. We can't use the same argument to show that it is surjective (why?), instead we have to rely on the pigeonhole principle to infer that \\( \kappa \\) is surjective as well.

Notice that \\( \text{Im }\kappa=g\[B\] \\). We can choose an \\( a\in A-B \\), then \\( g(a)\notin g\[B\]=\text{Im }\kappa \\). But this contradicts \\( \text{Im }\kappa=[[0,n]] \\), i.e, the surjectivity of \\( \kappa \\). \\( \Box \\) 

A corollary to this theorem is that \\( \omega \\) is infinite. The successor function \\( \sigma:\omega\to \omega-0 \\) is a bijection. Hence \\( \omega \\) has the same cardinality with a proper subset of itself, thus it can't be finite (hence it is infinite).

