---
published: true
layout: post
categories: Set-Theory
permalink: '/:categories/6'
---
{% include katex.html %}

A partition of a non-empty set \\( A \\) is a collection \\( \mathcal{C} \\) of non-empty subsets of \\( A \\) such that

- \\( \bigcup \mathcal{C}=A \\)
- For any distinct \\( X,Y\in \mathcal{C}, \ X\cap Y=\varnothing \\)

For example, if \\( A=\\{1,2,3\\} \\) then \\( \mathcal{C}_1=\\{\\{1\\},\\{2,3\\}\\} \\) is a partition of \\( A \\). Another example is \\( \mathcal{C}_2=\\{\\{1,2\\},\\{3\\}\\} \\). For any set \\( A \\) there is the trivial partition \\( \mathcal{C}=\\{A\\} \\) and \\( \mathcal{C}=\\{\\{a\\} \ \vert \ a\in A\\} \\).

Given a set \\( A \\) and a partition \\( \mathcal{C} \\) one can define a relation \\( R\subseteq A\times A \\) such that \\( xRy \\) iff \\( x,y\in X \\) for some \\( X\in \mathcal{C} \\). A relation created in this way is said to be an equivalence relation on \\( A \\). Notice that we have touched on the concept of equivalence relations early on, the difference now is that we are looking at things in a set theoretic perspective.

Example: If \\( A=\\{1,2,3\\} \\) and \\( \mathcal{C}=\\{\\{1,2\\},\\{3\\} \\), then the equivalence relation formed is

\\[ R=\\{<1,1>,<1,2>,<2,1>,<2,2>,<3,3>\\}. \\]

> Theorem 1.6.1 An equivalence relation \\( R \\) on a set \\( A \\) satisfies the following
- Reflexive: \\( xRx \\) for all \\( x\in A \\).
- Symmetric: For all \\( x,y\in A \\), \\( \ xRy \ \Longleftrightarrow \ yRx \\).
- Transitive: For all \\( x,y,z\in A \\), \\( \ xRy \ \land \ yRz \ \Longleftrightarrow \ xRz \\).

Proof. Reflexive and symmetric properties are obvious, so we will prove the transitive property only. Suppose both \\( xRy \\) and \\( yRz \\), this means that there are subsets \\( X,Y\subseteq A \\) from a partition \\( \mathcal{C} \\) for which \\( x,y\in X \\) and \\( y,z \in Y \\). Notice that \\( y\in X\cap Y \\) so the intersection is nonempty. This necessitates \\( X=Y \\), and \\( xRz \\) is obvious from here. \\( \Box \\)

We now would like to prove the converse, that is, if \\( R\subseteq A\times A \\) is a relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive (an RST relation on \\( A \\)), then \\( R \\) is an equivalence relation on \\( A \\). How can we prove whether or not an RST relation, \\( R \\), is also an equivalence relation? We would need to show that there exists a partition, \\( \mathcal{C} \\) of \\( A \\) such that the relation generated from this partition equals \\( R \\).

To this end we shall generate the notion of an RST class. Let \\( R \\) be an RST relation on \\( A \\), then for each \\( x\in A \\) we define the RST class of \\( x \\) (modulo \\( R \\)) as follows:

\\[ [x]_R=\\{ t\in A \ \vert \ xRt \\} \\]

The existence of \\( [x]_R \\) follows by filtering from \\( \text{im }R=A \\). Similarly, We can also form the set \\( \\{[x]_R \ \vert \ x\in A \\} \\) by filtering from \\( \mathcal{P}(A) \\). Our goal is to show that this set is the partition we are looking for.

Before moving on to the theorems and lemmas, lets look at an example:

> Let \\( A=\mathbb{N} \\) and \\( R\subseteq A\times A \\) be a relation defined by \\( xRy \\) if either both \\( x,y \\) are even or both are odd. Then \\( R \\) is an RST relation on \\( A \\), you should try check this for yourself.

Let us examine the RST classes which stem from this example: \\( [1]_R \\) would by definition be the set of all \\( x\in \mathbb{N} \\) such that \\( 1Rx \\). It is easy to notice then that

\\[ [1]_R=\\{1,3,5,7,\ldots\\}, \\]

the set of all odd numbers. In general, \\( [x]_R=\\{1,3,5,\ldots\\} \\) whenever \\( x \\) is odd. Similarly, \\( [y]_R=\\{2,4,6,\ldots\\} \\) whenever \\( y \\) is even. Therefore,

\\[ \\{[x]_R \ \vert \ x\in A \\}=\\{\\{1,3,5,\ldots\\},\\{2,4,6,\ldots\\}\\}. \\]

Notice that this creates a partition of \\( \mathbb{N} \\).

> Lemma 1.6.2 Let \\( R \\) be an RST relation on a set \\( A \\). If \\( a_1,a_2\in A \\), then \\( a_1Ra_2 \\) iff \\( [a_1]_R=[a_2]_R \\).

Proof. Suppose \\( a_1Ra_2 \\). Choose an \\( x\in [a_1]_R \\), then \\( a_1Rx \\). Combine this with our assumption (and that \\( R \\) is symmetric and transitive), we get \\( a_2Rx \\) so \\( x\in [a_2]_R \\). This shows \\( [a_1]_R\subseteq [a_2]_R \\). The converse is proved similarly.

Now suppose \\( [a_1]_R=[a_2]_R \\). By reflexivity, \\( a_2\in [a_2]_R=[a_1]_R \\) so \\( a_1Ra_2 \\) as needed. \\( \Box \\)

> Theorem 1.6.3 If \\( R\subseteq A\times A \\) is an RST relation, then \\( \mathcal{C}=\\{[x]_R \ \vert \ x\in A \\} \\) forms a partition of \\( A \\).

Proof. Notice that since \\( R \\) is reflexive we have \\( x\in [x]_R \\) for all \\( x\in A \\), so \\( \mathcal{C} \\) indeed consists of non-empty subsets of \\( A \\). We now prove the first condition: 

\\( \bigcup\mathcal{C} \subseteq A \\) is already obvious, so we only need to prove the converse. Choose an \\( a\in A \\), then \\( a\in [a]_R\subseteq \bigcup\mathcal{C} \\). This proves the converse. We now prove the second condition:

Suppose there are distinct \\( X,Y\in \mathcal{C} \\) such that \\( X\cap Y\neq \varnothing \\). This means that there is an \\( a\in A \\) such that \\( a\in X,Y \\). We have \\( X=[a_1]_R \\) and \\( Y=[a_2]_R \\) for some \\( a_1,a_2\in A \\). So \\( a_1Ra \\) and \\( a_2Ra \\). By symmetry and transitivity, we have \\( a_1Ra_2 \\). The lemma tells us that \\( [a_1]_R=[a_2]_R \\), a contradiction. \\( \Box \\)

Continuing on, we need to show that the equivalence relation generated from the partition, \\( \mathcal{C} \\) (we shall call it \\( R' \\)) is equivalent to the RST relation \\( R \\). \\( R' \\) is given as follows:

\\[ xR'y \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad x,y\in [z]_{R} \ \text{for some }z\in A \\]

but this is equivalent to \\( zRx \\) and \\( zRy \\), which by symmetry and transitivity gives \\( xRy \\) as we would expect it to be. In essence, we have shown that given a set \\( A \\) and an RST relation \\( R \\) on \\( A \\), we can generate a partition of \\( A \\) (by this we mean the set \\( \\{[x]_R \ \vert \ x\in A\\} \\)) such that the equivalence relation generated from this partition equals \\( R \\). The converse (Theorem 1.6.1) is true as well. Given a set \\( A \\) and a partition \\( \mathcal{C} \\) of \\( A \\), the equivalence relation generated from this partition satsifies reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity. Hence, it is also simultaneously an RST relation.

Since we have shown that an equivalence relation is equivalent with an RST relation, let us decide to rename the "RST class", we will now use the word "equivalence class" instead. We will also opt for using "equivalence relation" in place of "RST relation". This is the general convention.

### Quotient Sets

If \\( R \\) is an equivalence relation on \\( A \\), then we define the quotient set,

\\[ A/R=\\{[x]_R \ \vert \ x\in A\\}. \\]

In other words, \\( A/R \\) is simply the partition of \\( A \\) that is generated from the equivalence relation \\( R \\). We can also form a canonical mapping \\( \phi:A\to A/R \\) defined by

\\[ \phi(x)=[x]_R, \quad \text{for all }x\in A. \\]

It sends an element \\( x\in A \\) to whichever equivalence class it belongs.

### Equivalence Relation from a Function

Suppose we have a function \\( F:A\to B \\), then we can define a relation on \\( A \\) as follows:

\\[ xRy \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad F(x)=F(y). \\]

It is easy to check that this is in fact an equivalence relation on \\( A \\). We can do this either by showing that \\( A/R \\) forms a partition, or by showing that \\( R \\) satisfies reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity. There is a unique function \\( \hat{F}:A/R\to B \\) such that \\( F=\hat{F}\circ \phi \\) (where \\( \phi \\) is the canonical map from \\( A\to A/R \\) we just talked about).






